HERALDRY, 
HISTORICAL AND 
POPULAR BY 

CHARLES 
BOUTELL, M.A 

Charles Boutell 



9 

Digitized by Google 




****** 



MS*? ; : 



At** 



a - 4**,: if! 



I v«* a*^ "yt *r ' ffwP 



IP* 



^m:*s; ' * liMrifflMiiii 



Jm, 



'A # 



* a 



Digitii 



ogle 



3W 



Digitized by Google 



DIAPEK AND ( A 0 K N ( ' Y 



— . _ 




!*!• -u ■ tit j 'til »i W'.iijiiihutfi \t&gt;t«"v 



T 0 It i 



• IF ' :n 

: -. » ■ 



Digitized by Google 




Digitized by Google 



\ 



II ERALDRY, 



\ 



HISTORICAL AND POPULAR 



BY 



CILVULKS BO IT ELL, M.A.. 

ACT HOB OF 

MOM7M ENT A L IUIAME3 AND SLABS," " TUB MOM TTM KNTA L nilASSES OF ENGLAND,* 

MONrMENTa IN ENGLAND AND 



" A MANUAL OF ItKITtMl A 
ETC. ETC. ETC. 



Willi NINE HIJMMKh AND SEVKNTY-KIYK ILLI STRATIONS. 



" All the devices blazoned on the shield 
In their own Unct" 

IDTLL8 OF THE KlNO. 



milth F.IHTIOS, HEVISEI) ,1A7&gt; I. AUG ED. 




LONDON: 
IM( 'II A \\\) BKNTLEY, NBW BURLINGTON STlfKET, 
$uhliti)tr tit Gxuimtv to fctr m*\titt&gt;. 

1864. 



Digitized by Google 



LONDON: PBINTED BY v 11,1,1AM CEOWFS AND SONS, STAMFORD STREET 
AND CHARING CROSS. 



Digitized by Google 



PREFACE 

TO 

THE FIRST EDITION. 



It is the aim of this Voluino to inquiro into the true character 
and right office of Heraldry, and to describe and illustrate its 
general condition as it is in use amongst ourselves. 

Of the rise and progress of Heraldry, and of its almost uni- 
versal prevalence under variously modified forms, I have not 
attempted to give more than a slight and rapid sketch. I have 
been content also to refer only incidentally and in a few words 
to the value and interest of Heraldry, as a handmaid of History, 
as an ally of Art, and as the chronicler of Archaeology — my 
purpose being not so much to lead students on to the applica- 
tion of Heraldiy, as to enable them to apply it by becoming 
Heralds. In the following pages, accordingly, I have sought 
to define and elucidate tho principles of Heraldry, to exemplify 
its practice, and to illustrate at once its utility and its attrac- 
tiveness. Tho Heraldry of the present time I have desired 
uniformly to exhibit as the direct descendant and tho living 
representative of the Heraldry of the past; and the student 
will observe that I have systematically endeavoured to impress 
him with the conviction tliat Heraldiy is, essentially and at 
all times, inseparably associated with History, or at any rate 
with Biography. 



Digitized by Google 



PREFACE TO TIIE FIRST EDITION. 



This Volume does not profess to extend its range to legendary 
Heraldry, nor does it include even references to those fanciful 
and often fantastic speculations, in which tho early Ileralds 
delighted to indulge. The " Curiosities of Heraldry" in like 
manner, it leaves, with grateful and admiring acknowledgment, 
in the accomplished hands of Mr. Mark Anthony Lower. Re- 
peated references to standard works upon Heraldry I have con- 
sidered to bo neither necessary nor desirable, but instead of 
this, I have prepared and inserted a complete list of heraldic 
authorities; and in the preparation of my pages I have been 
scrupulously careful that every statement contained in them 
should be based upon certain and approved authority. 

Historical Heraldry occupies a position of such importance 
in Histories of England, that a certain amount of heraldic 
knowledge has become indispensable to the student of English 
History. 

Every Gothic Architect ought to be a thorough Herald. 
Heraldry alono can enable him to render his works, in the 
noblest and most perfect sense, historic monuments. Without 
Heraldry, no lover of the great Art, which has been so happily 
revived amongst us, is able either to feel the full power of 
what the Gothic has transmitted to him from the olden time, 
or to realize all that it is now able to accomplish as a living 
Art. 

Historical Painters, having at length learned to estimate 
aright the worth of archaeological accuracy, constantly re- 
quire that information which Heraldry is ever ready to 
impart. 

It is the same with Sculptors, when they treat of subjects 
that are derived from either mediaeval or modern History, 
or that are in any way associated with Gothic Architec- 
ture. 

To Illuminators, Heraldry opens a wide and richly diversi- 
fied field of attractive study. Tho beautiful and deservedly- 



Digitized by Google 



PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION. 



popular Art of Illumination finds in Heraldry a most versatile 
and efficient confederate. True Illumination, indeed, is in its 
nature heraldic; and true Heraldry provides for Illuminators 
the most appropriate, graphic, and effective, both of their sub- 
jects and of the details and accessories of their practice. 

In some sense or degree, also, Heraldry enjoys the favour of 
the general public. To many persons, as to seal engravers and 
herald painters, it provides what may be styled a profession. 
Whoever has, or desires to have, a M coat-of-arms," professes to 
know something about Heraldry ; that is, he is favourably dis- 
posed towards it, though perhaps he is unconscious of the 
sentiment. It is always pleasant to the pedestrian public — 
many of them bearers of time-honoured arms and having the 
reddest of red blood flowing in their veins — to be familiar with 
the heraldic blazonry that appears upon the panels of aristo- 
cratic carriages. Nor is it less satisfactory, when we chance 
to see a flag displayed and blowing out in the breeze, or when 
our eyes rest upon an heraldic seal, or when we discover a 
shield of arms in a book, or on a monument, or amidst the 
decorative accessories of some building, to be able to read what 
Heraldry thus has written with her peculiar symbols. And 
then, as a matter of course, Heraldry, as of old, receives a 
becoming homago from the wealthy inheritors of historic names 
and noble titles; while a similar homage is no less cordially 
tendered by those whose Heraldry, like thoir own position in 
the great world of society, is at least of comparatively recent 
growth. 

From each and all of these Friends of Heraldry, this Volume 
ventures to anticipate a welcome, inasmuch as it aspires to 
place before them, in a plain and simple form, whatever 
heraldic teaching they may require; and also because, as a 
book of reference, they will find it to be trustworthy, easy 
to be consulted, and, as far as it professes to go, complete. 



Digitized by Google 



P R E FA C E 

TO 

THE SECOND AND THIBD EDITIONS. 



If ever 1 had indulged the hope tliat a Second Edition of this 
work might be required, I certainly had not contemplated the 
realization of any such speculation without an interval of several 
years between the publication of the First Edition and tho 
appearance of its successor. My surprise, accordingly, was as 
great as my gratification, when I found myself called upon by 
my original publishers, before my First Edition had been pub- 
lished two months, to preparo for them a Second Edition with all 
possible speed. 

The corrections and additions that I was anxious to make, so 
far as I was enabled to accomplish them at all, were made whilo 
my Second Edition was actually passing through the press. 
Materials in abundance were ready at hand; and indeed tho 
• cordial generosity with which the most valuable assistance, often 
unasked, has constantly been placed at my disposal, I am alto- 
gether unable adequately to acknowledge. From such great 
kindness, coupled with tho very gratifying reception that my 
" Hkkaldhy " has experienced, I venture to infer that my Volume, 
however imperfectly executed, has been conceived in the right 
spirit. 



Digitized by Google 



PREFACE TO THE SECOND AND THIRD EDITIONS. ix 

Whatever errors and omissions in the First Edition had been 
brought to my notice, it was my endeavour in the Second Edition 
to correct and supply : at the same time, I was constrained to 
withhold various additions that had been suggested to mo, in 
consequence of being unable to extend my volume beyond 
certain prescribed limits. Whatever fresh matter was intro- 
duced, was carefully kept in conformity with my original plan, 
and in itself it was what I hoped would prove to be both useful 
and attractive to students of Historical Heraldry. The Chapter 
on 4i Marshalling " was considerably extended ; and two Chapters 
instead of a single one were assigned to " Cadency :" the number 
of the Chapters, however, remained the same, since two very 
short Chapters of the First Edition were united together. The 
Illustrations in the Second Edition received numerous important 
additions. 

About a year after the first appearance of this work, tho 
Second Edition was exhausted, and at the samo time the copy- 
right passed from the hands of Messrs. Winsor and Newton 
to those of Mr. Bkxtley, the eminent publisher of New Burling- 
ton Street. This Third Edition, now published by Mr. Bentlky, 
I have most carefully revised and corrected throughout ; and it 
has received many additions of the greatest importance. To all 
points connected with heraldic rule, authority and early usage, 
I have directed my special attention. The Chapters previously 
entitled 44 Marshalling " and 44 Cadency," now appear, enlarged 
and rearranged, severally bearing the following titles — 44 Alar 
shalling and Inheritance," and &lt;4 Cadency and Differencing." 
Chapter XVI. has been devoted exclusively to 44 ltoyal Cadency," 
which has been treated in it in as systematic a manner as 
possible. Tho Chapter on the 44 Koyal Heraldry of England " 
has been in part re-written; and tho Chapter on 4 • Foreign 
Heraldry " has been considerably extended. 

Again 1 have introduced several fresh Ulustrations. They 
consist of twenty-four additional wuud-cuts, printed with the 



Digitized by Google 



X 



PREFACE TO THE SECOND AND THIRD EDITIONS. 



text ; and four lithographic Plates, numbered LXX1X., LXXX., 
LXXXI., LXXXIL, and containing twelve examples: thus, my 
Illustrations, in all, now number upwards of nine hundred and 
seventy examples. Plate LXXIX., engraved from a photograph 
. of the original slab, which several years ago was brought from 
Venice to England, will be regarded with much interest, both 
from its peculiar heraldic character, and from the singular 
circumstances connected with its recent history, and also from 
the no less singular manner in which it was assigned to the 
individual — one of two great rivals, whose armorial insignia it 
does not display. 

I greatly regret to have been obliged again to reprint 
my original lithographs without any alteration in the num- 
bering; and also, as in the Second Edition, to intersperse 
the additional Plates amongst those that were before engraved. 
Thus, in the arrangement of tho Plates the order of numerical 
succession has not been regularly maintained. I trust that the 
Lists of tho Plates and of tho Individual Examples in a great 
measure will rectify any inconvenience that may arise from this 
circumstance. In the text I have habitually inserted a reference 
to tho Plato in which each example is placed, except in the case 
of those examples that are printed with the text itself. Many 
of the Illustrations that I have obtained from monumental 
memorials, have been engraved by StoTHAHD and others ; but 
I have not considered it necessary to refer to the Plates in those 
more costly and Icbs accessible works, in which the Heraldry is 
subordinate to the monumental character of the subject repre- 
sented ; and as, with rare exceptions, 1 have myself personally 
examined tho originals, I have generally been enabled to rely 
upon my own notes and sketches for the fidelity of my examples. 
I feel sure that my additional examples from the grand old Abbey 
Church of St. Alban will continue to be regarded with the 
utmost interest, (Nos. 633, 690, and 711 to 717 inclusive). 
Plates XIX. and XXIII. have been lithographed again, since the 



Digitized by Google 



PREFACE TO THE SECOND AND TH1RI» EDITIONS. XI 

publication of my First Edition, and the former Plato has been 
re-arranged. It will be understood that No. 364 a., in Plato 
XX I II., has been drawn in oxact conformity with the original 
shield. My chromo-lithograph, Plate VII., of the noble champleve 
enamel shield of Earl William de Valence, has also been en- 
graved, a second time, in order to render with exact accuracy 
the diaper upon the bars that are argent. I have elsewhere 
(see Chap. XXXIII.) noticed the publication of the fac-simile 
chromo-lithograph of this shield, of the full size of the original, 
after his own drawing, by Mr. L. Berrington, of Westminster 
Abbey. 

The publication of Mr. Seton's able and thoroughly heraldic 
treatise on the Heraldry of Scotland, confirms my belief that a 
feeling for Historical Heraldry is gradually extending its influence 
throughout this country. It will rest with those to cherish and 
to stimulate such a feeling, who have already learned to value 
Historical Heraldry because they have formed a just estimate of 
its true character. The " Herald and Genealogist" a periodical 
publication conducted with characteristic ability by Mr. John 
Gough Nichols, while it renders valuable aid to students of 
Heraldry, bears testimony to the prevalence of an interest in 
heraldic subjects. And I am persuaded that Mr. Papworth's 
excellent " Ordinary of Arms" only requires to be more widely 
known and more correctly understood, to be consistently appre- 
ciated, and consequently to be warmly supported. 

I venture to request from the possessors of early Rolls of 
Arms, early Grants and Confirmations, and other unpublished 
heraldic documents, such information as may enable me to form as 
complete Lists as possible of such records for future publication. 
I shall also feel truly grateful for any notices of fine examples of 
Shields of Arms, Badges, &amp;c, and any other heraldio memoranda. 
I have prepared, for the uso of students of Heraldry, and others, 
several groups of plain shields, arranged in pages of the size of this 
volume, which may be filled in with the bearings of Shields of 



Digitized by Google 



xii PREFACE TO THE SECOND AND THIRD EDITION* 

Aims. I myself have found these pages of outline shields to 
be very useful and convenient, and they have been approved 
by more than one friend who loves and studies Heraldry. 
They may be obtained from the publisher of this work, printed 
on paper adapted to receive colour. 

At the College of Arms I have always found the most valuable 
aid ready to be given to mo with the greatest liberality and 
kindness; and I also have invariably experienced at the hands 
of the professional Heralds the most generous encourage- 
ment, coupled with the most gratifying approval. To William 
Courthope, Esq., Somerset Herald, Registrar of the College 
of Arms, I desire to tender my especial thanks; and I also 
gratefully acknowledge the assistance I have received from 
Robert Laurie, Esq., Clarencioux King of Arms. While to all 
who in any way have aided me, in general terms I offer my 
thanks, I am bound to record my more particular obligation 
to the Rev. John Woodward, of New Shoreham; to the Rev. 
Charles Brooke Bicknell, Rector of Stourton, near Bath; to 
John Gough Niciioi^s, Esq., F.S.A. ; to the Rev. H. W. Hodgson, 
Rector of King's Langley, Herts ; to T. G. Bayfield, Esq., and 
to A. W. Mokant, Esq., F.S.A., and F.G.S., of Norwich. 

In tho First and Second Editions, the Index was divided 
into three distinct sections ; but for this present Edition I have 
prepared a single Index, which comprehends all that was con- 
tained in the three sections that preceded it, and which also is 
much more copious in itself, and will be found calculated greatly 
to facilitate reference to the work. 

Throughout the preparation of my First Edition I constantly 
received from one valued Friend the most important assistance : 
now, to my great sorrow, I associate this present Edition with 
the cherished Memory of the same dear and deeply-lamented 
Friend. 

C. B. 

Norwood, October, 1804. 



Digitized by Google 



CONTENTS. 







Preface to tho Find; Edition . . . . 


V 


Preface to the Second and Tliirrl Editions 


. viii 


CHAPTER L 




Introductory ...... 


1 


CHAPTER TL 




Heraldic Blazon, Nomenclature Language, and Laws 


8 


CHAPTER TTT 




The Shield—its Parts, Points, and Primary Divisions; 


and 


Dividing and Border Lines .... 


. 13 


CHAPTER IV. 




Tinctures and Furs ...... 


19 


CHAPTER V. 




Tho Ordinaries and their Diminutives, and the Roundlos . 


. 21 



CHA P T ER V I, 

The Horaldry of the Cross . . , , , 20' 

CHAPTER VTT. 

The Snbordinariea , . . , . . , 31 

CHAPTER VIII. 
Varied Fields and Diapers . . . . . 35 



y Google 



XIV CONTENTS. 



Page 



CHAPTER IX. 

Miscellaneous Chaggggj Part I., Inanimate Objects. . . 32 

CHAPTER X 

Miscellaneous Chargos: Pnrt II., Animate Beings . . . 55 

CHAPTER XI. 

Miscellaneous Charges: Part III., Natural Objects . . IQ 

CHAPTER XII. 

Descriptive Terms . . . . • • .II 

CHAPTER XIII 

Miscellaneous Names and Titles, not included under the term 
" Charges " • 9Q 



CHAPTER XIV. 
Marshalling and Inheritance 

CHAPTER XV. 
Cadency and 1 Mffe renting . 



. 113 



CHAPTER XVI. 

Royal Cadency 23Q 

CHAPTER XVII. 
Badges, Crests, Snpportors, Mottoes, and Knots . . .251 



. 286 



CHAPTER XVIII. 

Flags 

CHAPTER XXX. 

The Royal Heraldry of England . . .223 

CHAPTER XX. 

Orders of Knighthood, and Insignia and Augmentations of 
Honour '^22. 



d by Google 



CONTENTS. 

CHAPTER XXT. 
( Mticial and Corporate Heraldry 

CH AP TE R X XIT. 

Architectural Heraldry 

CHAPTER XXITL 

Monumental Heraldry 

CHAPTER XXIV. 
The Heraldry of Seals and Coins 

CHAPTER XXV 
The Heraldry of Illuminations 

CHAPTER XXVf 
Genealogies .... 

CHAPTER XXVII. 
Precedence. ..... 

CHAPTER XXVTTT 
Augmentation and Abatemont 

CHAPTER XXTX 
Modern Heraldry .... 

CHAPTE R XXX. 
Heraldic Treatment, Drawing, and Colour 

CHAPTER XXXT 
Examples of Shields of Arms 

CHAPTER XXXIT. 
Foreign Heraldry .... 



Xvi CONTENTS. 

Page 

CHAPTER XXXIII. 
Supplementary . . . . .481 

List of Plates 493 

List of Illustrations 496 

General Index ....... 507 



Digitized by 



HERALDRY, 



RICAL AND POPULAR. 



CHAPTER L 

INTRODUCTORY. 

An inquiry into the Heraldry of the past leads us back almost 
to the remote fountain-head of human history. From the very 
earliest periods, we find it to have been an usage universally 
prevalent amongst mankind for both individuals and communi- 
ties to be distinguished by some Sign, Device, or Cognizance. The 
idea of symbolical expression coupled with a love of symbolism 
appear, indeed, to constitute one of tho component elements 
of the human mind, as well in the rude condition of savage 
life as in every progressive advance of civilization and refine- 
ment. Through tho agency of such figurative imagery tho 
mind is able both to concentrate a wide range of thought within 
a very narrow compass, and to give to the whole a visible 
form under a simple image. The mind thus speaks to the 
eye. By this symbolical blazonry a multiplicity of definite 
impressions are conveyed, in tho simplest manner, and with 
poetic impressiveness. By such means, also, tho mind is em- 
powered to combine the imaginative with tho real, and, while 
extending its speculations beyond the bounds of ascertained 
verities and actual facts, to impart a definite character to tho 
visions of the imagination. 

The exercise of a faculty such as this, it is easy to conceive, 
would be held in the highest estimation in the primitive stages 



Digitized by Google 



■2 



INTRODUCTORY. 



of human socioty. Men so circumstanced had much to say ; 
but they had only rare opportunities for speaking, and they 
knew but few words in which to convey their meaning. They 
delighted, therefore, in an expressive symbolism, which might 
speak for them, laconically, but yet with emphasis and to the 
point. Their symbolical language, also, would commend itself 
to their favour in a peculiar manner, through the facility with 
which it would extend and intensify its own phonetic powers 
by means of accumulative association. 

War and the chase would naturally furnish the imagery 
that would first become prevalent. A man's physical powers or 
peculiarities, as a warrior or a hunter, or tho issue of some 
exploit in which he might have been engaged, would determine 
his distinctive personal cognizance. If swift of foot, or strong 
of hand, or fierce in demeanour, or patient of hardship, he 
would naturally seek to symbolize himself under the form of 
some animal distinguished pre-eminently for one or othor of 
those qualities. For, it is natural that man should find symbols 
of his own physical attributes in tho inferior animals ; because 
in mero swiftness, or strength, or such like qualities, those 
animals are superior to man. The next thing would be to 
render this personal symbolism hereditary. A man's son 
would feel a natural pride in preserving the memorial of his 
father's reputation, by assuming, and also by transmitting his 
device. It would be the same with the comrades of a chief, 
and with the subjects of a princo. Thus a system of Heraldry 
would arise and become established. 

■ 

And such is actually the process, which has produced and 
matured its own Heraldry amongst each of the various races 
and tribes of the earth. In the Far West, the Red Indian, 
from time immemorial, has impressed upon his person the 
totem of his people — tho cognizance that his fathers bore, and 
by which they were distinguished before him. In the very 
constitution of his mind essentially a lover of symbolism, tho 



Digitized by Google 



INTRODUCTORY 



3 



Oriental revels, and he always has revelled, in a truly charac- 
teristic Heraldry. In the relics of the wonderful races that 
once peopled the valley of the Nile, this Ileraldry of the East 
is everywhere present. Another expression of the same semi- 
mystic symbolism was found, deep buried beneath the mounds 
of Assyria. Somewhat modified, it was well known in ancient 
Israel. In Europe, with the first dawn even of historical 
tradition, the existenco of a Heraldry may be distinguished. 
Nearly six hundred years before the Christian era, yEschylus 
described the heraldic blazonry of the chieftains who united 
their forces for tho siege of Thebes, with all the minute 
exactness of our First Edward's chronicler of Caerkverock. 
Hie well-known Eagle of the Romans may be said to have 
presided over tho Heraldry of Rome, as their own Dragon has 
ever presided over that of the Chinese. The legendary annals of 
mediaeval Europe abound in traces of a barbaric Heraldry, in 
tho war-banners of the chiefs and in their personal insignia. 
The Bayeux Tapestry of the Conqueror's Consort may be placed 
at tho head of the early existing illustrations of the Heraldry 
of Britain. That celebrated piece of royal embroidery exhibits 
a complete display of the military ensigns in use at tho period 
of the Conquest, by both the Norman invaders and the Saxon 
occupants of this island. Illuminations in MSS. take up and 
cany on the Heraldic record. Seals, carvings in ivory, monu- 
mental memorials, stained glass, and tho various productions 
of the architectural sculptor, gradually contribute their several 
memoirs, and lead us on to tho full development of English 
mediaeval Heraldry through the agency of the Crusades. 

Tho Crusades formed the armed followers of the different 
European princes into a military alliance for a common pur- 
pose, and also brought the rude yet gallant soldiers of the 
West into contact with all that then existed in Eastern lands 
of the refinement, both military and social, of still earlier 
times. Among the many and important results of those 

b 2 



Digitized by Google 



4 



INTRODUCTORY. 



strange and strangely romantic enterprises, wore great changes 
in the weapons and armour of the western chivalry ; and these 
changes were accompanied with the introdnction of an infinite 
variety of armorial devices. Tho Crusade confederacy itself 
would necessarily demand the adoption, by the allied Sove- 
reigns, of a more definite system of military standards and 
insignia than had been previously prevalent. Tho use of im- 
proved defensive armour, also, combined with a better system of 
organization and discipline in tho armour-clad bands, rendered 
it necessary for each warrior of any rank to assume and wear 
some personal cognizance, without which he could not have 
been distinguished at a time when tho ascertained presenco 
of certain individuals was of such grave importance. And 
tho device of each baron or knight would be assigned, with 
appropriate modifications, to their respective retainers and 
followers. In this manner, Crests were introduced, and placed 
on basinets and helms ; and thus some recognized device or coin- 
position was displayed upon all knightly pennons and banners, 
and was emblazoned both upon the rich surcoats which tho 
knights wore over their armour, and upon the shields which 
so long formed most important components of their defensive 
equipment. Such is the origin of Shields-of-Arms and Coats- 
of-Arms, — terms that we still retain, with representations of 
tho Shield, and with Crests, in our own Heraldry at tho pro- 
sent day. 

In England, Heraldry may bo considered to have first 
assumed a definite and systematic character during the reign of 
Henry III., a.d. 121G to 1272; and at the close of the thir- 
teenth century it may be said to have been recognized as a 
distinct science. The heraldic devices that were adopted in 
England in tho thirteenth century, in common with those 
which were added to them during tho century that followed, 
partook of tho ideal character of all symbols, but at the same 
time they were distinguished by a simple and dignified expres- 



Digitized by Google 



INTRODUCTORY. 



5 



siveness. And they were associated directly, and in a peculiar 
manner, either with individuals, families, establishments, poten- 
tates, or with the community at large : so that they may be 
considered after a definite method, their varieties readily admit 
of classification, thoir characteristics may bo clearly elucidated 
and fully set forth, and they may bo subjected to certain general 
laws and treated as forming a system in themselves. This 
classification and description, and the general laws themselves, 
we now unite with the devices and compositions under the 
common name of Heraldry. And with tho Heraldry of the 
thirteenth century wo associate that of the fourteenth, and of 
succeeding centuries, and of our own era, assigning to tho whole 
the same common title. For, as it happened in tho instance 
of Architecture, when once it had been duly recognized in 
England, Heraldry rapidly attained to an advanced degree of 
perfection. Whatever the Heralds of Edward L might have 
left to bo accomplished after their time, their successors of 
the fourteenth century were not slow in developing. Under tho 
genial influences of the long and brilliant reign of Edward III., 
inedieeval Heraldry attained to its culminating point. Tho 
last quarter of the fourteenth century proved to be equally 
favourable to the Heralds. And again, during the Lancastrian 
era, and throughout tho struggle of the Roses, English Horaldry 
maintained its reputation and its popularity. Its practical 
utility was felt and appreciated by tho Tlantagenets in their 
fierce social wars, as it had been before their time by tho Cru- 
saders. Then, witb a general decline of the Arts, Heraldry 
declined. Its art-character, indeed, had shown signs of a 
coming degradation before the accession of tho Tudors to the 
disputed throne of this realm. The next downward step 
seriously affected the early simplicity of tho art-science, so 
that the Heraldry of the sixteenth, seventeenth, and eighteenth 
centuries can advance but comparatively slight claims upon our 
present consideration. And thus we are brought onwards to 



Digitized by Google 



6 



INTRODUCTORY. 



the great and general Art-Revival of our own times, in which 
Heraldry again appears in the act of vindicating its titles to 
honourable recognition, as an Art-Science that may be advan- 
tageously and agreeably studied, and very happily adapted, in 
its practical application, to the existing condition of things by 
ourselves. 

When thus directing the attention of students to the 
Heraldry of the past, I am anxious to impress upon them the 
remembrance of the fact, that tho main object of our inquiry 
has reference to our own present use and application of 
Heraldry in the days of Queen Victoria. All true Heraldry 
is historical, though it by no means follows that it must always 
be necessarily popular. Our Heraldry, however, aspires to be 
such as may claim to be entitled both "popular" and "his- 
torical :" but the historical condition of our Heraldry does not 
imply that wo should enter into the elucidation of mediaeval 
Heraldry, purely for its own sake. We find Heraldry to have 
been in England a growth of the Middle Ages : and, conse- 
quently, when wo desire to familiarise ourselves with this Art- 
Science, we are constrained in the first instance to direct our 
thoughts back to the middle ages, in order to obtain much of tho 
information that wo need for present use. This differs widely 
from a study of mediaeval Heraldry, undertaken and conducted 
for tho sake of reproducing mediaeval Heraldry. It is impossible 
to press this consideration too urgently, not only upon living 
Heralds, but also upon all who are interested in the Arts and 
Art-Manufactures of our country at tho present day. The Arts 
of the middle ages are replote with precious teachings for our- 
selves ; and yet they are not by any means calculated to be 
reproduced by us in their original condition. They were tho 
Arts of those times — they then arose, and they flourished 
through their direct association with their own em. It is most 
true, that at all times they may be studied with certain 
advantage ; and it is also no less true, that a mere imitation of 



Digitized by Google 



INTRODUCTORY. 



7 



thoir former operation indicates that error in judgment, which 
ignores the all-important mutatis mutandis, and so leads to a 
mistaken course of action. And then, on the other hand, 
nothing can be more absurdly irrational than to reject what the 
Arts of the middle ages can teach so well, upon the alleged plea 
that any such study involves a modern mediaivalism. Here, 
as in other matters, a middle course lies open invitingly before 
us. Whatever wo find to be really valuable and useful in the 
Arts of the middle ages we gratefully accept ; and, as we know 
that our predecessors in departed centuries matured their own 
thoughts for their own advantage, and applied their Arts to 
thoir own use, so we take thoir teaching, and associate it in its 
practical application, not with them, but with ourselves. When 
we seek to apply our knowledge, from what source soever we 
may have acquired it, we look around us, and wo look before 
us, seeking both to adapt our knowledge to present require- 
ments, and to expand its range that it may become applicablo 
to tho requirements of the future. By no means content to be 
imitators and copyists, we aim at excellence in our works, 
through the judicious, consistent, and appropriate application 
of sound principles, under the guidance of an observant and 
well-disciplined experience. It will be understood, then, when 
I refer in the following pages to tho Heraldry of tho thirteenth 
and fourteenth centuries, that I do so without the slightest 
intention, on the one hand, to suggest that either our Guards- 
men or our Volunteers should be equipped in the armour and 
surcoats of the Tlantaganets, or, on the other hand, to fix the 
standard of the Heraldry of to-day in accordance with the 
heraldic fashion prevalent when the Black Prince was invested 
with the Order of the Garter. 



Digitized by Google 



A. I). 

No. 1.— Arms of the Crusader Kings of Jerusalem. 



CHAPTER II. 

HERALDIC BLAZON, NOMENCLATURE, LANGUAGE, AND LAWS. 

In Heraldry, the term Blazon, or Blazoning, is applied 
equally to the description and to the representation of all 
heraldic figures, devices, and compositions. It also indicates 
the arrangement of the component members and details of any 
heraldic composition. Historical Blazoning, also entitled Mar- 
shalling, denotes the combination and arrangement of several 
distinct heraldic compositions, with the view to produce a single 
compound composition. In like manner, the disposition and 
arrangement of a group or groups of heraldic compositions or 
objects, is styled Marshalling. 

All heraldic figures and devices, whether placed upon shields, 
or borne or represented in any other manner, are entitled 
Charges ; and every shield or other object is said to be charged 
with the armorial insignia that may be displayod upon it. 

Heraldic Language is most concise, and it is always minutely 



Digitized by Google 



HhRALMC BLAZON AND NOMENCLATURE. 



9 



exact, definite, and explicit ; all unnecessary words are 
omitted, and all repetitions are carefully avoided ; and, at the 
same time, ovory detail is specified with absolute precision. 

The Nomenclature is equally significant, and its aim is to 
combine definitive exactness with a brevity that is indeed 
laconic. As might naturally be expected, both the Language 
and the Nomenclature of Heraldry habitually indicate their 
Norman-French origin. 

Heraldic Devices are described, first, in the order of their 
comparative importance ; and, secondly, in the order in which 
they are placed upon the shield, or other object that bears 
them. Thus the character of tho surface of the shield itself, 
which forms the foundation of the heraldic composition, is first 
specified. Then follows a description of the principal charge, 
which occupies the most central and most commanding position, 
and which also is considered to rest immediately upon tho 
surface of the shield. Objects of secondary importance, which 
also rest upon the shield itself, are next described ; and finally, 
descriptions are given of such other devices and figures as may 
be placed upon another charge, and which consequently appear 
to be carried by an object that is nearer to the surface of tho 
shield than they are themselves. In some instances, as when a 
Chief, a Canton, and a Bordare appear and are charged, the 
composition will require to bo blazoned in two groups, pre- 
cedence being given to the central and more important group. 

In blazoning any Charge, tho title, position or disposition' 
tincture, and distinctive conditions of the device or figuro are 
first to bo specified, and then there will succeed such descrip- 
tions of details and accessories as may be necessary, in their 
order of comparative importance : the tincture of any Charge, it 
is to be observed, is always to follow the name of the Charge 
itself; thus, a lion rampant sable, is the proper arrangement of 
tho words. 

If a tincture or a number should occur twice in the same 



Digitized by Google 



10 HERALDIC BLAZON, NOMENCLATURE, 



sentence of any descriptive blazon, such tincture or number is 
to be indicated by reference to the words already used, and 
not by actually repeating them. Thus, should any Charge be^ 
of the same tincture as the field, it is said to be M of the field ;" 
or, as the tincture of the field is always the first that is specified 
in the blazon, a Charge of that tincture may be blazoned as 
of the first." 

So any Charge is said to be 44 of the second? " of the third" 
44 of the last" &amp;c. if its tincture be the same as the second, the 
third, the last, or any other that has been already specified. 
In the instance of the metal gold, instead of reference to the 
heraldic term 14 Or," the word 44 gold " itself may be used. The 
position or disposition of any Charge or Charges are to be 
blazoned first after the name or title of the Charge or Charges. 
"When the same Charge is several times repeated in the samo 
composition, the figures are generally arranged in rows, one 
row being above another. Such an arrangement is indicated 
by simply stating the number of the figures in each row : as, 
44 six crosses crosslets, three, two, and one," to denote three in the 
uppermost row, then two below them, and then one crosslet in 
base. When any single Charge is blazoned between three others, 
as a fesxe between three tortmux, two of the torteaux are placed in 
chief and one in base ; aud this same arrangement is observed, 
should the same Charge appear three times without any other 
device. If a single Charge is placed between six others, then 
three are in chief and three in base. A single Charge occupies a 
central position. Any deviation from these dispositions must be 
specified. 

In heraldic descriptions, the presence and the position of 
the stops or points demand especial attention. A comma pre- 
cedes and follows each item of every descriptive clause, and the 
consistent intervention of the more important points must bo 
observed with rigid precision. Every abbreviation must be 
marked by a full stop ; thus, arrj. is the abbreviated form of 



Digitized by Google 



LANGUAGE, AND LAWS. 11 

argent. This abbreviation-point is not to supersedo or interfero 
with tho comma or other point, which may bo required to 
follow any word whether abbreviated or oxprossed in full; 
thus, org., on a chev. gu. three lioncels sa., is correct pointing. 
It appears desirable always to print all heraldic blazon in Italic 
type, and all proper names in small capitals : also, it is always 
right to print, three lion's jambs, three palmer's staves, dc, and 
not three lions' jambs, three palmers staves, die. Tho student will 
bear in mind that in Ileraldry, while nothing is specified that 
can be distinctly and certainly understood without description, 
so nothing whatever is left to tho possibility of contingency or 
misapprehension. 

It is a positive rule in Heraldry, that Metal shall not appear 
upon Metal, nor Colour upon Colour ; that is, a Charge of ono 
of the Metals must rest upon, or be in contact with a surfaco 
or another charge of one of the Colours ; and in like manner, a 
charge of one of the Colours must rest upon, or be in contact 
with a surfaco or object of one of tho Metals. This rule, 
absolute in its primary application, admits of a partial relaxa- 
tion in the case of varied surfaces, and of certain details of 
charges ; and also in those compositions, in which a supported 
device or figure extends in tho shield beyond tho charge that 
supports it. The solitary early violation of this heraldic law is 
the armorial ensign of the Crusader Kings of Jerusalem, who 
bore five golden crosses upon a silver shield, that thus their 
Anns might be distinguished from those of every other poten- 
tate ; No. 1, p. 8. Tho early form of tho Jerusalem Cross is 
represented in Shield B; and the more recent and generally 
accepted form in Shield A. 

^'hen any Chargo is repeated in such considerable numbers, in 
the same composition, as to produce almost the appearanco of a 
pattern, tho Field so covered is said to be Semee with the 
Charge in question. It will be observed that a Field which is 
Semce is often treated as if it were cut to the required size and 



Digitized by Google 



12 



HERALDIC BLAZON AND NOMENCLATURE. 



shape from a larger extent of surface, some of the Charges being 
only partially represented. The ancient shiold of France, nobly 
emblazoned in the North Choir-Aisle of Westminster Abbey, in 
the work either of Henry HI., or of his son Edward L, bears 
azure, seme'e de Jys or; No. 2, p. 12. 

When the often-repeated figure is of very small size, tho term 
Powdered or Poudrte is substituted for Seme'e. 

In Heraldry, every Coat or Shield of Arms, Crest and Badgo 
is attached to the Name, and not to the Title, of tho person who 
may bear them. 

All figures and devices represented in heraldic compositions 
have various attributes, qualities, and epithets assigned to them 
by Heralds, which express their several positions and disposi- 
tions, and indicate tho parts which they take in the aggroupment 
of tho whole. Thus the sun is said to be in its glory, or eclipsed ; 
the moon is said to be increscent, or decrescent ; human figures aro 
variously habited; animals aro said to be armed with the horns, 
or the appendages provided for them by nature for their defence 
or for aggressive purposes. Similar appropriate terms indicato 
tho circumstances under which figures and objects of all kinds 
appear in heraldic compositions, together with their individual 
peculiarities, details, and accessories. These terms are classified 
aud explained in Chapters TX., X., XI., XII., and XIII. 




No. 2. —FRANCE Ancient. 



Digitized by Google 




No. 3. No. 4. No. 5. No. 6. 

Heraldic Shields. 



CHAPTER III. 

THE SHIELD, AND ITS PARTS, POINTS, AND PRIMARY DIVISIONS; AND 

DIVIDING AND BORDER LINES. 

The Shield, tho most important piece of their defensive armour, 
was derived by the knights of the middle ages from remote 
antiquity, and at almost all times it has been decorated with 
some device or figure. The ancient Greek tragedian, ^Eschylus 
(about B.C. GOO), describes with minute exactness tho devices 
that were borne by six of tho seven chiefs who, before the 
Trojan War, besieged Thebes. The seventh shield is specially 
noted to have been uncharged. In the middle ages, in Europo, 
there prevailed a precisely similar usage ; and, indeed, so uni- 
versal was the practice of placing heraldic insignia upon shields, 
that the shield has been retained in modern Heraldry as being 
inseparable from all Heraldry, so that it still continues to be 
the figure upon which the heraldic insignia of our own times 
are habitually charged. 

Early heraldic Shields vary very considerably in their forms, 
the simplost and most effective forms having the contour of an 



Digitized by Google 



14 



THE SHIELD, AND ITS PARTS. 



inverted equilateral arch, slightly stilted, as No. 3, or No. 7, in 
Plato I. The shields actually used by the Normans in England 
were long and tapering ; they are exemplified in the equipment 
of the knightly effigies in the Temple Church, London. To 
these succeeded short, almost triangular, heater-shaped shields. 
Examples abound in the monumental effigies of the thirteenth 
and tho fourteenth centuries. The equilateral form became 
prevalent early in tho fourteenth century, at which period 
several modifications of the prevailing form were introduced. 
Two of the more effective of these varieties, Nos. 4 and 5, are 
severally drawn from the Percy Monument at Beverley, a.p. 
1350, and tho Monument of JonN of Eltham, in Westminster 
Abbey, A.r&gt;. 1336. In the next century the shields were 
shortened, and as it advanced their form was altogether 
changed, and became somewhat square, the outlines being pro- 
duced by a series of concave curves : No. 6a. Shields of this 

* 

class appear to have been introduced during the second half of 
tho fourteenth century, but they did not become general until 
a later period. In these shields a curved notch is cut out, for 
the lance to pass through, in the dexter chief ; when thus 
pierced, the shield was said to be o bouche ; No. 6. This form 
of shield may be advantageously used in Modern Heraldry, 
particularly when any composition has many charges, or when 
there are quarterings ; it would seem, however, to be desirable 
not to represent any shield as a bouche in modern Heraldry, 
since shields now do not require any adjustment to knightly 
lances laid in rest. And there is some danger lest a misappre- 
hension should arise with reference to the shield a bouche, now 
that its use has so long passed away : thus, in each of the upper 
spandrels of the fine trussed timber roof of Lincoln's Inn Hall 
there is carved a shield a bouche ; and these shields have been 
made to correspond with one another, as they range along tho 
two opposite sides of the Hall, so that on one side the shields 
have the notches cut out, quite correctly, in their dexter 



Digitized by Google 



THE SHIELD, AND ITS PAKTS. 



15 



chief, and the other series have their notches cut in their 
sinister chief. 

Several very effective forms of late shields are sculptured 
upon tho monument to Abbot Hamrydoe, in St. Albans Abbey, 
which may be studied with advantage by modern Heralds, to- 
gether with the simple pointed shields of earlier times; No. 6 a. 




No. C a. 



The form of the Shield, as a matter of courso, may be deter- 
mined in Modern Heraldry in accordance with the preference of 
every Ilerald. All that I would suggest is, that the preference 
may as well rest upon the more agreeable rather than the less 
attractive forms. 

In early architectural and monumental compositions, and 
also often upon seals, heraldic shields are represented as if 
suspended from the guige, or shield-belt, which was actually 
worn by the knights to sustain and to securo their shields 
to their persons. In some instances of this always effective 
becauso always consistent and appropriate arrangement, tho 
long guige appears on either side of the shield, and is there 
passed over a corbel ; as in No. 7, Plate I., one of the beautiful 
series of shields, in the choir-aisles of Westminster Abbey, 
which is charged with the arms of Raymond, Count of Pro- 
vence, — or, 4 pallets gules. The more prevalent usage was to 
represent the shield as being suspended from a singlo corbel, 
boss, or a cluster of foliage, or from some architectural member 
of the composition, as No. 135, Plato I. ; occasionally, and moro 
particularly on seals, the shield appears as if suspended by the 



Digitized by Google 



16 T11K SHIFXD, AND ITS PARTS. 

sinister chief angle, and so hangs diagonally from the helm and 
crest, as No. 301, Plate I., also No. 629, Plate LXVI. : a shield 
tlms suspended is said to be couche. These modes of arrange- 
ment, with the various modifications of them that will readily 
suggest themselves, are worthy of the most thoughtful attention 
of the practical modern Herald. 

The Heraldic Shield is sometimes entitled an Escutcheon : and 
when one shield is charged upon another, the shield thus placed 
is distinguished as an Inescutcheon, and is said to bo borne in 
pretence. 

The different parts of an heraldic shield are distinguished and 
entitled as follows : — No. 8. 

A. Dexter Side. B. Sinister Side. 

C. Chief. D. Base. 

E. Dexter Chief. F. Shutter Chief 

G. Middle Chief H. Dexter Base. 

I. Sinister Base. K. Middle Base. 

L. Honor Point. M. Fesse Point. 

Heraldic shields are divided in the manner indicated by 
examples, Nos. 9 to 14. 

No. 9, is Per Pale, or Impaled. No. 10, is Per Fesse. 

No. 11, is Per Cross, or Quarterly. No. 12, is Per Bend. 

No. 13, is Per Saltire, and No. 14, is Per Chevron. 

When a Shield is divided into more than four parts by lines 
drawn in pale and in fesse, crossing each other at right angles, 
it is said to be Quarterly of the number of divisions, whatever 
that number may be : thus, No. 1 5 is Quarterly of eight. 

In the instance of a Quartered Shield having one or more of 
its Quarters quartered, this compound division is indicated by 
the term Quarterly-quartered ; and the four primary Quarters are 
distinguished as Grand Quarters ; thus in No. 16, A, B, C, D are 
the Grand Quarters, of which the first and the fourth, A and D, 
are Quarterly-quartered. 



Digitized by Google 



SHIELDS OF ARMS &amp; ACHIEVEMENT OF ARMS. 

' u £?z?.r.6 i:. v: xv «• fXK 



I'ROVENCF. 




fciDWAKD 




t 



Digitized by Google 



THE SHIELD, AND ITS PARTS. 



17 



The Heraldic Shield is always considered to bear its charge 
upon its face, or external surface, and consequently the Dexter 
and the Sinister sides of the shield itself are those, which 
would severally cover the right or the left side of a warrior 
when holding the shield in front of his person. The Dexter 
side of an heraldic composition or object, therefore, is opposite 
to the left hand of an observer, and the Sinister to his right 
hand. This use of the terms Dexter and Sinister is invariable in 
Heraldry. 

Tho heraldic shield is sometimes represented as bowed, or as 
if having a slightly convex contour ; and shields of the form of 
No. 6 often have a ridge dividing them in pale. 

The entire surface of a Shield is called tho Field. Tho samo 
term Field is also applied to the entire surface of any Charge or 
Object. 

Tho same terms that denote the parts and points of a Shield, 
are also applicable to a Flag, or to any figuro that may bo 
charged with an heraldic composition. In Flags, the depth 
from chief to baso is entitled the " Hoist" and tho length from 
the point of suspension to the fore extremity is distinguished 
as the " Fly" which latter tenn also denotes tho fore extremity 
of any Flag. 



No. 8. No. 15. No. 1(1. 

c. 




No. 9. No. 10. No. 11. No. 12. No. 13. No. 14. 



Digitized by Google 



18 



THK SHIELD, AND ITS PARTS. 



Dividing and Border Linos, in addition to simple right 
lines and curves, assume tho forms indicated in Example, 
No. 17. 



A. Engrailed . . 
H. Inverted . 




-zszszszs 

AVsAAAAA 



0. Wavy, or Undee 



D. jftftittfe . . 



B, Indented. . 

F. Daneette . . 

G. Embattled . 

H. ito/pi/ce . . 

I. Dovetail . . 



The Ordinaries and other charges aro constantly formed 
with these lines: as a Borduro may be indented, a Chief 
nebuUe, a Fesso daneette or embattled t a Cross engrailed, &amp;c, tvc. 
See Nos. 02, 04, 114, 115, 300 a, 310 b, 390, 410, 43:5 and 
477. 




Digitized by Google 




No. 18. No. 10 

Two Mctala. 



CHAPTER IV. 

TINCTURES. 

The Tinctures of Heraldry comprise two Metals, five Colours, 
and eight Furs. 

They are severally distinguished, entitled, and indicated as 
follows, in Examples, Nos. 1« to 32. 

METALS. 
Titles. Abbreviations. 

1. Gold. Or. Or. No. 18. 

2. Silver. Argent. Arg. „ 19. 




No. 20. No. 21. No. 22. No. 23. No. 24. 



Five Colours. 
COLOURS. 





Title*. 


Abbreviations. 




1. Blue. 


Azure. 


Am. 


No. 20. 


2. lied. 


Gules. 


Gu. 


„ 21. 


3. Black. 


Sable. 


Sa. 


n 22. 


4. Green. 


Vert. 


Vert. 


„ Zi. 


5. Purple. 


Purjmre. 


Purp. 


„ 24. 



c 2 



Digitized by Google 



20 



TINCTURES. 



1. Ermine. 

2. Ermines. 

3. Erminois. 

4. Pean. 

5. Vair. 

6. Counter Vair. 

7. Potent. 



No. 25. 
20. 
27. 



»» 



FDR8. 

Black spots on a whit© field. 
White spots on a black field. 
Black spots on a gold field. 
Gold spots on a black field. 

Nob. 28 and 29. 
No. 30. 
31. 



8. Counter Potent. „ 32. 

The Metals may be expressed by gold and silver, or by 
yellow and white. 

The representation of the Tinctnres by means of dots and 
lines was not in use amongst Heralds before the time of the 
accession of the Stuarts to the English Crown. 

Tho student will observe that the metals always take pre- 
cedence of the colours, unless a contrary arrangement be specified. 
Also, that Fair, Counter Vair, Potent and Counter Potent are 
always Argent and Azure, unless other tinctures are named in 
the blazon. See Chap. XXX. 

Objocts and Figures represented in heraldic composition in 
their natural colours, are said to bo proper, abbreviated ppr, 

the furs. 




No. 25. 



No. 26. 



No. 27. 



No. 28. 




No. 29. 



No. 30. 



No. 31. 



No. 32. 



Digitized by Google 



No. 40 A. — DE CLARK. 



CHAPTER V. 

THE ORDINARIES AND THEIR DIMINUTIVES, AND THE 

ROUNDLES. 

The earlist devices of Mediaeval Heraldry are simple figures, 
entitled Ordinaries, which have been held by all Heralds in 
high esteem and honour, and retain their old rank in tho 
Horaldry of the present day. They still somotimos appear, as of 
old, alone, or almost alone ; while in many instances the Ordina- 
ries are associated with other devices, or are themselves charged 
with various figures. In thoir simplest condition, Jho Ordi- 
naries are formed by right lines ; but they also admit, instead of 
right lines, the various border linos of Example, No. 17. 

The Heraldic Ordinaries are nine in number, and aro severally 
entitled, tho Chief, No. 33 ; the Fesse, No. 34 ; the Bar, No. 35 ; 
the Pale, No. 36 ; the Cross, No. 37 ; the Bend, No. 38 ; the 
Saltire, No. 39 ; the Chevron, No. 40 ; and the Pile, No. 41. See 
Plate II. 

Several of those Ordinaries havo Diminutives, which are • 
grouped with them in tho following descriptions of the Ordi- 
naries themsolvcs. 



Digitized by Google 



22 



THE ORDINARIES AND THEIR DIMINUTIVES. 



L The Chief, No. 33, formed by an horizontal line, contains 
in depth the uppermost third part of the field or area of the 
shield. It may be borne in the same composition with any 
other Ordinary, except the Fesse. 

The Diminutive of the Chief is the Fillet, the contents of which 
must not exceed one-fourth of the Chief, of which it always 
occupies the lowest portion. 

II. The Fesse, No. 34, which is identical in form and in area 
with the Chief, diners from that Ordinary only in its position 
in the field of the shield, of which it always occupies the 
liorizontal central third part. 

The Fesse has no Diminutive, but it may be surmounted by 
a Tale or a Bend. 

III. The Bar, No. 35, differs from the Fesse in its width 
beiug one-fifth, instead of one-third of the field. The Bar may 
be placed horizontally in any part of the field, except absolutely 
in chief or in base. Two Bars frequently appear in the same 
composition, in which case it is the usual practice to divide the 
field horizontally into five equal parts, and to assign to the Ban 
the two spaces that are on oither side of the central space, as in 
No. 42. A Single Bar never appears in an heraldic composition 
without some other Ordinary . 

The Bar has two Diminutives, the Closet, and the Barrulet, 
which are respectively one-half, and one-fourth of tho width of 
the Bar itself. 

When either of these Diminutives is placed on each side 
of a Fesse or Bar, the Ordinary is said to be cotised, as 
No. 43. 

When Barrulets are placed together in couples, as in No. 44, 
each couplo is entitled a pair of Bars OemeUes. 

IV. Like the Chief and the Fesse, the Pale, No. 36, occupies 
• one-third of the field ; but its position is vertical instead of hori- 
zontal, and it accordingly appears in an erect position always in 
the centre of tho field. The Pale is an Ordinary of eompara 



Digitized by Google 



ORDINARIES ROUNDLfES. 




Digitized by Google 



[•HE ORDINARIES AND THEIR DIMINUTIVES. 



23 



tively rare occurrence. It has two Diminutives, the Pallet, and 
the Endorse, which are severally one-Mf and one-fourth of its 
width. 

A Pale, between two Endorses is said to be endorsed. No. 
45. 

A Pallet may appear in any vertical position in the shield. 
See No. 7, Plate L 

V. In its simplest form, the heraldic Cross, No. 37, is pro- 
duced by the meeting of two vortical with two horizontal lines, 
about the Fesse point, No. 8, M, of the Shield ; or it may bo 
defined to be the combination of a Fesse with a Palo. When 
charged, tho Cross occupies about one-third of the field ; but 
otherwise it occupies only one-fiftJi of tho field. So numerous 
are tho modifications of form, decoration, and arrangement 
which Heralds have introduced into this Ordinary, that I 
propose to devote a separate chapter to the " Heraldry of tho 
Cross." 

VI. The Bend, No. 38, is formed by two parallel lines drawn 
diagonally, at equal distances from the Fesse-point, from the Dexter 
Chief to the Sinister Base. When charged, tho Ordinary con- 
tains one-third, but when plain it contains one-fifth part of the 
field. Two uncharged Bends may appear in the same Com- 
position. The Bend also is associated with other Ordinaries, 
or it may be placed over other Charges. Charges set on a 
Bend are placed Bendwise: that is, they slope with the Bend. 
No. 46. 

The Diminutives of the Bend are tho Bendlet, containing 
one-half of the Bend, and tho Cotise* containing one-half of the 
Bendlet. 

A Bend placed between two Cotises, is said to be cotised. 
No. 47. 

A Riband is a Cotise couped (cut off smooth) at its extremi- 
ties, so that it does not extend to the odgos of tho Shield. 
No. 48. 



Digitized by Google 



24 



THE ORDINARIES AND THEIR DIMINUTIVES. 



A Bond, when issuing from the Sinister instead of the Dexter 
Chief, is distinguished as a Bend Sinister. 

VII. Tho Saltire, No. 39, or Diagonal Cross, is a combination 
of a Bend with a Bend Sinister. It contains one-fifth of the 
field, but one-third when it is charged. 

Tho Saltire may appear in tho same Composition with the 
Chief. It has no Diminutive. Charges set on a Saltire slope 
with each of its limbs. No. 49. 

VIII. Tho Chkvron, No. 40, whioh comprises somewhat 
more than tho lower half of a charged Saltiro, occupies one-fifth 
of tho field. 

T100 Chevrons may appear in tho same Composition, or a 
singlo Chevron may bo blazoned with a Chief. Charges sot on 
a Chevron slopo in the same manner as those that are charged 
upon a Saltiro. No. 49. 

The Diminutive of this Ordinary is the Chevronel, which con 
tains one-half of a Chevron. The De Clares bore, Or, tiirce 
cJtevroncls, gules. No. 40 A, (p. 21). 

IX. The Tile, No. 41, a wedge in form, generally issues 
from the Middle Chief and extends towards the Middle Base, 
of a shield. Occasionally, however, this Ordinary is borno in 
tho same diroction as the Bend ; or it may issuo from various 
parts of tho enclosing line of a shield. 

In early shiolds tho Fesse, Pale, Cross, Bend, Saltire and 
Chevron are go do rally very narrow, as Nos. 33 a, and 33 b. 

Charges are often placed and arranged after tho form of tho 
Ordinaries : thus, charges may bo IN Chief, No. 49 a ; in Fesse, 
No. 49 i«; in Pale, No. 49 c; in Cross, No. 49 d; in Bend, 
No. 49 E ; in Saltire, No. 49 f ; in Chevron, No. 49 g ; and in 
Pile, No. 49 H. 

With tho Ordinaries may be associated another group, of 
the simplost character and in general uso. These figures are 
the Seven ROUNDLKS, each of which possesses its own distinctive 
title, l'late II. 



Digitized by Google 



THE ROUNDLES. 



25 



They are : 

1. The Bezant,— or. No. 50. 

2. The Plate,— argent. No. 51. 

3. Tho Hurte— azure. No. 52. 

4. The Torteau, — gules. No. 53. 

5. The Pellet,— sable. No. 54. 

6. The Pomme,—vert. No. 55. 

7. The Fotrntam. No. 56, 

which last is divided horizontally by wavy linos, and is alter- 
nately argent and azure. 

In representation, tho Bezant, Plate, and Fountain, are flat, but 
the other Ronndles are to appear spherical, and to be shaded 
accordingly. 

A Roundle of one of tho Furs, or tincturod in any other man- 
ner, or if charged, must have its distinctive character specified 
in tho blazon. In early blazon all tho Roundlos havo their 
tinctures specified ; and it would seem to bo desirable to resume 
this early habit, except in tho instances of tho Bezant and tho 
Plato. 




No. 33 a. No. 33 i«. 



DE SEVILLE. DE LACY. 

{ Roll of Anns, temp. Edw. I.) (Couuter Seal, a.i&gt;. 1235.) 



Digitized by Google 













/A 









/ /y \\ II X ^ 



No. G3. No. 04. 

First Union Jack. Sceond Union Jack. 



CIIAPTER VI. 

THE HERALDRY OF THE CROSS. 

The Cross, as an heraldic symbol, has already been defined 
to be a combination of two others of the Ordinaries of Heraldry, 
the Fe8se and the Pale. When it is not repeated in the same 
Composition, and when the contrary is not set forth in the 
blazon, tho simple Cross is placed erect in the centre of the 
Shield, and it extends to the limits of the field. Many Crosses, 
however, may be introduced into tho same composition: or a 
single Cross may be placed within a Bordure: or it may be 
interposed between other Charges upon tho Shield : or it may 
itself be charged : or it may appear under a variety of conditions 
affecting both its form and its position. 

Tho Greek Cross, No. 57, has its four limbs all of equal 
length. Hate III. 

The Latin Cross, No. 58, has its uppermost limb and its 
transverse limbs of tho same length, the fourth limb or shaft 
being considerably longer than the other three. In some cases 
the uppermost limb of a Latin Cross is either longer or shorter 
than the two transverse ones. 

Tho Cross without any upper limb, No. 59, is entitled the 



Digitized by Google 



HERALrDRY OF THE CROSS. 




i 



Digitized by Google 



Digitized by Google 



THE HERALDRY OF THE CROSS. 



27 



Cross of St, Anthony, or the Tau Gross, from its form being the 
same as the Greek Character Tau (T). 

A diagonal Cross is entitled a Saltire. The Crosses of St. 
Andrew of Scotland, No. 60, and of St. Patrick of Ireland, 
No. 61, are Crosses-Saltires, the former being Argent, on a field 
Azure, and the latter Gules, on a field Argent. 

The Cross of St. George of England, No. 62, is Gules, upon a 
field Argent. 

The Combination of the Crosses of St. George and Sr. 
Andrew produced the First Union Jack, No. 63, which was 
declared in 1606, by King James I., to constitute the National 
Ensign of Great Britain. It happily symbolises the Union 
of England and Scotland, in the union of tho Crosses of the 
two realms. 

In 1801, in consequenoe of the legislative Union with Ire- 
land, a Second Union Ensign superseded its predecessor. 
The new compound device was required to comprehend the 
three Crosses of St George, St. Andrew, and St. Patrick in 
combination. It appears, charged upon a banner, in No. 64, 
and is well known to every Englishman as the blazonry dis- 
played upon that 44 Meteor Flag of England," of which tho poet 
wrote in words of fire. The blazonry of this, tho Second Union 
Jack, is borne by tho Duke of Wellington, charged upon a 
Shield of Pretence over his paternal arms. It is an "Aug- 
mentation of Honor," significant and expressive, granted to 
the Duke. The Duke of Marlborough bears, in like manner, 
the Cross of St. George upon a Canton. See Chap. XXXI. 
The Union Device is displayed, as a national ensign, in Flags 
only, — except in the copper coinage of the realm, which exhibits 
a seated Britannia, with a shield always incorrectly blazoned 
with this Union Device. This inaccuracy is in the diagonal 
crosses, which are made to assume the appearance of a single 
diagonal Cross having a narrow fimbriation — a narrow border, 
that is, of equal width on either side of it. 



Digitized by Google 



28 



THE HERALDRY OF THK CROSS. 



It will bo observed that in both the Union Devices, Nob. 
63 and 64, the Cross of St. George appears with a narrow white 
bordor, which is entitled a Fimbriation. Also, that in the 
Second Union, the Cross-Saltire of St. Patrick has its four 
limbs fimbriated on one side. 

No. 65 is an examplo of a fimbriated Cross. It will be ob- 
served that the Fimbriation lies in the same piano with the 
Cross, to whioh it forms a border. Hence there is no shading 
between the Fimbriation and the Cross, but the Fimbriation 
itself is duly shaded. In case one Cross should bo placed upon 
another, tho primary or lower Cross would display a broader 
bordor than tho Fimbriation ; and it is also indicated, by shading 
both the Crosses, that one Cross is surmounted by another. Tho 
student will compare Nos. 65 and 66. 

When the central area of a Cross is entirely romoved, so that 
of the Ordinary itself little more remains than the outlines, 
such a Cross is said to be voided, as No. 66 a. 

No. 67 is a pointed Cross. 

A Cross crossed at the head, as No. 68, is a Patriarchal 
Cross; and when placed upon steps, as No. 69, a Cross is 
said to be on Degrees. 

When tho extremities of a Cross do not extend to tho Chief, 
Base, and Sides of a Shield, it is said to bo couped, or humette'e, 
as No. 70. 

The Cross of eight Points, distinctively so called, and known 
also as a Maltese Cross, is represented in No. 71. This Cross 
was borne by tho Knights Templars, Gules, upon a field 
Argent. By the Hospitallers, or Knights of Sr. John, tho 
same Cross was borne Argent, upon a field Sable. The student 
of Mediaeval History will romember that between the years 
1278 and 1289, when engaged in military duties, the Knights 
Hospitallers bore a white Cross, straight, upon a red field. 

A Cross which expands into a squaro at tho centre, as in 
No. 72, is a Cross Quadrate. When a square aperture is pierced 



Digitized by Google 



THK HERALDRY OF T!IK CROSS. 



29 



through its ccntro, as in No. 73, a Cross is quarter pierced. 
The term quarterly pierced, denotes the cntiro removal of tho 
central portion of the Cross, tho four limbs only being left in 
contact, as in No. 74 : see also tho arms of tho Earl of 

WlNTERTON. 

Tho beautiful varieties of the Heraldic Cross which follow 
aro generally borno in small groups ; occasionally, however, a 
single figure of any one of these Crosses may bo seen alone. 

No. 75 is tho Cross Moline: and No. 76 is the Cross Be- 
cercele'e. 

Tho Cross Polonce, No. 77, perhaps tho most beautiful of tho 
Heraldic Crosses, expands moro widely than tho Molino, and 
has its extremities floriated. It appears in the arms assigned 
to Edward the Confessor, No. 78, Plate L ; and it was 
borne by Wm. de Vesci, a.d. 1220, and by Wm. de Fortibus, 
about 1250. 

Tho Cross Flcurie, No. 79, has its four limbs straight, instead 
of expanding liko the Patonco ; and tho Cross Flcurettie, No. 
80, which may bo regarded as a modification of the Cross 
Fleurie (though by some Heralds these two Crosses aro con- 
sidered to be identical), is a plain Cross, couped, and having a 
Fleur-do-lys issuing from each extremity. 

Examples of Crosses having floriated terminations, occur in 
Rolls of Arms of Hesry III. and Edward I. 

No. 81 is tho Cross Pommee ; No. 82 is the Cross FourcMe ; 
and No. 82 a is the Cross Urdee, p. 30. 

A Cross crossed towards tho extromity of each limb, as No. 83, 
is a Cross Crosslet, and is an equally favourite and beautiful 
Charge. When the Field is covered with small Crosses Crosslots, 
it is said to be Crusilly, or CrusiUe. 

When the Shaft of any Cross is pointed at the base, it is said 
to bo Fitchee, " fixablo," that is, in tho ground. 

The Cross Crosslet Fitchee is shown in No. 84. 

Tho Crosses Patte or Formh, and Patcc or Firrmee Fitchie % 



Digitized by Google 



30 



THE HERALDRY OF THE CROSS. 



are shown in Nob. 85 and 8f&gt;. These Crosses may be drawn 
either with right lines, or with their radiating lines slightly 
curved. 

The Crosses Botonee or Treflee, and Botonee or TrejUe Fitche'e, 
Nos. 87, 88, and 388 B, PL XLVIII., are modifications of the 
Crosslet. 

The Cross Potent, No. 89, resembles the Fur which bears the 
same name, No. 31. Nos. 90 and 91 severally represent the 
Crosses Potent Fitchee, and Potent Quadrate. 

A Cross may be formed of any of the Border Lines ; thus, 
Nos. 92, 93 and 94 are respectively Crosses Engrailed, Wavy or 
Undee, and Bagulee. 

When any Charges are placed upon a Shield hi a cruciform 
order of arrangement, t hey are said to be in Cross ; thus, No. 95 is 
Argent, five Fusils in cross, gide*. 




No. 82 A.-Crf&gt;*» UnW. 



Digitized by Google 



STTBORDINARIES 



_ VARIED FIEIrDS. 




No. 99. No. 99 a. 

I»E MORTIMER. 



CHAPTER VII. 

SUBORDINARIES. 

The term Setbordinary is applied to a group of devices, less 
simple, and also less important than the Ordinaries, bnt which 
still admit of a certain general classification. Thoy are fourteen 
in number. Plate IV. 

L The Canton, No. 96, is a square, situated in the dexter 
chief of the shield, and it occupies about one-ninth part of the 
entire fiold. This Subordinary in early shields was of larger 
size, and it appears to have superseded the Quarter, now not in 
use. 

2. The Gyron, No. 97, is half of tho first quarter of the 
shield, that quarter being divided diagonally by a line drawn 
from the dexter chief. 

3. The Inescutcheon, or Shield of Pretence, No. 98, is 
a small shield pretended upon the face of the shield. An In- 
escutcheon of silver, or sometimes of ermino, was borne by the 
Mortimers: Nos. 99 and 99 a, and Nos. 269, 270; also Nos. 
388 f, and 388 o, PI. XXVH. See PI. XXIV. 

4. The Ori.e, Nos. 100 and 376, may be described as tho 



Digitized by Google 



32 



SUR0RDIN ARIES. 



narrow border of a shield charged upon the field of a larger 
Bhiold. Sometimes a series of separate charges form an Orle ; 
that is, when they are so arranged that they form a kind of 
border to the shield. In this case, snch charges aro said to be 
In Orle, or they may bo blazoned as an Orle. Thus, the Db 
Valences bore Barruty arg. and az., an orle of martlets gu. ; 
No. 101, Plate V. ; Plates VII., and XXXVIII. : also Plates 
XXVII. and XLVIII. 

5. The Tressure, No. 102, is a double Orle enriched with 
Flours de lys: it is blazoned in the Royal Shield, No. 103, PI. 
V., and in several of the baronial shields of Scotland. The 
Tressure first appears in the Shield of Alexander III., A.n. 
1249-1287. See also Plates LII., LVIII., LIX. Impalement 
generally dimidiates the Tressure, as in No. 345, PI. XXII. ; but 
in early examples this rule is occasionally superseded, as in 
No. 344, PI. XXII., and No. 719, PI. LII. 

6. The Lozenge, No. 104, is a four-sided figure, set diagonally 
upon the shield. See also No. 719, PL LII. 

7. The Fusil, Nob. 105, 405-7, is a narrow elongated 
Lozenge. 

8. The Frette, No. 106, is an interlacing figure, which may 
bo said to be compounded of a narrow Saltire, and a Masclo. 
It was borne by the Despencers, No. 107, and still appears 
in Arms of the Earl Sr-ENCER. When the interlacing bars of 
a Frette are repeated, so as to cover the field either of the 
Shield or of any Charge, such a field is said to be Frettic. This 
Frette- Work is supposed to be in relief upon tho field, and 
therefore in any representation of it it is to bo shaded : Nos. 
106 A, PI. IV., 435 a, and 436, PI. L. 

9. Flanches, No. 108, and No. 602, and Flasques or Voiders, 
No. 108 a, are formed by two curved lines, and are always borne 
in pairs, one on either sido of the field. 

10. The Mascle, Nos. 101, 441, PI. XLIX., and 609, PI. 
XL V., is a Lozenge voided. 



SHIEI/DS OF ARMS. 



df. valf.nck SCOTLAND 




LE DE SPKNCKR BRITTANY 




♦ i 



Digitized by Google 



SUBORDI N A RI ES. 



33 



11. The Rust re, No. 110, is a Lozenge, pierced with a 
circular opening in its centre. 

12. The Billet, No. Ill, is a rectangular oblong. A field 
semee of Billots is Billetee ; Nos. 410, 411, PI. XL VIII. 

13. The Label, No. 112, is a Riband crossing the shield bar- 
wise, and having three, four, five, or sometimes a larger number 
of shorter ribands depending from it at regular intervals : seo 
Label, in Chap. JX.: also Plates XXXI., XXXIII., XXXIV., 
XXXVI., XLIX., and No. 33 b, p. 25. 

14. The Bordure, No. 113, constitutes a border to the shield, 
and contains in breadth one-fifth part of the field. In Mediaeval 
Ileraldry both the Label and the Bordure were borne as Differ- 
ences. The Bordure now is frequently borne as a Charge : it is 
always represented in relief upon the shield, and in the same 
plane with the Ordinaries. (See Bordered, in Chap. XII.) The 
Bordure is not affected by Quartering ; No. 364 a, PI. XXIII., 
and No. 663, Fl. LXII. ; but Impalement dimidiates the Borduro, 
as in Nos. 320, 321, PL XVIII., and Nos. 346, 34G a, PL XXII. ; 
in some early examples, however, as No. 340, PI. XX., and 
Nos. 342, 343, PI. XXII., an impaled Borduro is not dimidiated. 
The Borduro may bo plain, as in No. 113; or engrailed, or in- 
dented, as in Nos. 114, 115; or it may bo charged with any 
device, as in No. 194, PI. V., the Arms of Richard, Earl of 
Cornwall, second son of King John, who died a.d. 1296. His 
hhield — org., within a bordure so. bezantee, a lion rampt. gu., crowned 
or — remains in the choir-aisle series at Westminster : see Plates 
XVIII., XIX., XXII., XXIII., XXXIL, XXXIX., LI., LXII. 
LXXIII. A curious early example of a Borduro bezantee is 
preserved on the shield of an unknown knight, whoso effigy yet 
remains at Whitworth: this shield, No. 115 a, p. 34, is carved 
in low relief. 

When a Canton and a Bordure aro blazoned upon the same 
shield, the Canton surmounts tho Bordure; as in No. 116, PI. V., 

D 



Digitized by Google 



84 



MTBORDINARIKS. 



the Arms of .Iohn de Dreux, Count of Brittany, nephew of 
Kdw. I., thus blazoned in the Caerlaverock Roll, — chequec or and 
Of., a bordure gu. teme'e of lions of England ; a canton (or quarter) 
erm. Seo also Nob. 442, 453-6, Plates XL. and L. 




No. 115 a. Shield of Effigy nt Whitworth. 



Digitized by Google 



No. 121.— De Grey. 



CHAPTER VIII. 

VARIED FIELDS AND DIAPERS. 

Both Shields and the Charges which they bear frequently 
have their surfaces varied in their tinctures, the devices or 
patterns thus adopted being derived from the Ordinaries and 
Subordinaries. 

It must be carefully observed, that in these Varied Fields 
all the parts lie in the same plane or level, and that they differ in 
this respect from fields which are charged or have devices set 
upon them. It follows that in Varied Fields no shading what- 
ever is introduced, nor is any relief indicated. 

1. A Field divided after the manner of a Gyron, is said to 
be Gyronny. This division generally comprises eight pieces, 
as in No. 117, PI. IV.; but, sometimes, as in No. 118, it has 
six only. 

2. A Field Lozengy, No. 119, PI. IV., is divided into Lozenge- 
shaped figures. 

3. In a Field Fusilly, No. 120, the divisions are narrower than 
in Lozengy. 

4. Barry is formed by dividing a Field into an even number of 
Bars. In blazoning, the number is specified; thus, No. 121, 
page 35, is — Barry of Six, arg. and az., borne by the Earl De 

D 2 



Digitized by Google 



36 



VARIED FIELDS AND DIAPERS. 



Grey. When the bars are more than eight in number, tho term 
Barrtdy may bo used; as in No. 101, Plato VII. 

5. Paly is formed by dividing the Field into an even number of 
Pales, tho number to be specified; thus, No. 121 a is paly of 8. 
Compare No. 7, Plate I. 

6. Bendy is formed by dividing the Field into an even number 
of Bends, in blazoning the number being specified; No. 121 b, 
Pi IV. 

7. Barry Bendy, No. 122, is produced by lines drawn hori- 
zontally, bar-wise, crossed by others drawn diagonally, or bend- 
wise. 

8. Paly Bendy, No. 123, is produced by lines drawn pale-wise, 
crossed by others drawn bend-wise. 

9. When the Field of any charge is divided into a series of 
small squaros, if there is a single row only of such squares, that 
arrangement, exemplified in No. 124, is styled Compony or 
Oomponee; accordingly, No. 124, PI. IV., is blazoned,— A Bor- 
dure compone'e, arg. and az., borno by tho Duke of Beaufort : see 
mates XXII. and XXXII. 

10. When there aro two rows of squares, having tho metal 
and colour alternating, it is Counter Componee, as in No. 125. 

11. Should tho division exhibit more than two rows of alter- 
nate squares, as in No. 126, and in No. G23, PI. LII., it is Chcqutc 
or Cheeky. In all these instances the Tinctures must be specified 
in tho blazon. 

12. A Field may also bo divided simply after tho manner 
indicated by tho form and position of an Ordinary ; as Per Pale, 
&lt;fcc., as I havo already shown in Chapter III. 

13. Tho term Counter-changing is employed to denote a reci- 
procal oxchange of Metal for Colour, and Colour for Metal, either 
in tho same Composition or tho same Charge. This arrange- 
ment implies tho presence of one Metal (or Fur), and one Colour, 
and that whatever is charged upon the Motal should bo tinctured 
of the Colour, and that whatever is charged upon the Colour 



Digitized by Google 



VARIED FIELDS AND DIAPERS. 



should be tincturod of tho Metal. In one of tho Rolls of Arms 
of Henry III. a curious early exauiplo of Counterchanging occurs 
in tho Shield of Robert de Chandos, No. 127, — Or, a Pile gules, 
charged with three Estoiles and between six others, all of them counter- 
changed : Plate VI. 

14. Diaper is every system of decorative design that is intro- 
duced by Heralds to increaso the vividnoss of any surface, 
whether the Field of a Shield or of any Charge. Diaper, accord- 
ingly, is an ornamental accessory only, and not a Charge Great 
care, therefore must always be taken in tho introduction of 
Diapering, to keep the accessory in duo subordination to tho 
true heraldio design, that there may not arise oven a suspicion 
of the Diaper taking a part in the blazon. 

This Diaper may be executed in any Tincturo that is in 
keeping with heraldio rule, but it does not affect in any degree 
the heraldic Tinctures of tho composition. A very effeetivo 
Diaper is produced by executing tho dooorativo accessory in a 
different tint of the same tincturo with tho Field, or in black. 
Gold and Silver Diapers may bo placed upon Fiolds of any of 
tho Colours ; and all Diapers are applicable to every variety of 
Charge. 

In tho Heraldry of the middle ages Diapering was in con- 
stant use, and the Heralds of those days havo transmitted to us 
abundant evidence of their skill in its application. It appears 
to bo most desirable to revive tho general adoption of this beau- 
tiful system of ornamentation in all surfaces of any extent. 

In Heraldry in Stained Glass it is always peculiarly desir- 
able to diaper tho Field, and also all Ordinaries and other 
Charges of largo size and simple form ; such also is tho case in 
whatever Heraldry may be introduced into Illuminations. 
In Sculptured Heraldry, Diapers may be executed with excel- 
lent effect in slight relief. 

From amongst almost innumerable fine examples of early 



Digitized by Google 



38 



VARIED FIELDS AND DIAPERS. 



heraldic Diaper, I must be content to specify those which may 
yet be traced upon the Monuments of Queen Eleanor of Castile, 
a.d. 1290; of William de Valence, Earl of Pembroke, a.d. 1206, 
No. 101, Tlato VII. ; and of Edmond, surnamed 44 Crouchback," 
Earl of Lancaster, a.d. 1296: also upon the Effigies of Kino 
Henry III., a.d. 1272 ; of Kino Uichard I., and Anne of Bohemia, 
his Queen, a.d. 1394, all of them in Westminster Abbey : as also 
the Shields upon the Peecy Shrine, about a.d. 1350, in Beverley 
Minster; the Shield of Kobert de Vere, Earl of Oxford, a.d. 
1298, at Hatfield Broadoak, Essex, No. 158, Plate VI., (this 
Diaper, like those of Beverley, is in relief). The Field of the 
Brass to Abbot Thomas De la Mere, about a.d. 1375, in St. 
Alban's Abbey Church ; and the entire Brass, a.d. 1347, to 
Sir Hugh Hastings, at Elsyng, in Norfolk. In Plate VI. two 
of the diapered Shields of the Percy Shrine are represented : 
No. 127 a is PERCY — Or, a lion ramp. az. ; and No. 127 c is De 
Warrenne— Chequce or and az. No. 127 B is another Shield of 
De Warrenne, diapered in gold and colour, from the remains of 
Castle Acre Priory, Norfolk, about a.d. 1300. The examples of 
admirable Diaper that abound in early Seals, Illuminations, and 
Glass, almost defy selection. I give a single specimen in No. 510 : 
see also Chapter XXX. 




No. 510.— Diftpcr of the Seal of Thomas Plantauejjkt, K.(i., Duko of 
Gloucester (enlarged). See Chap. XVII., Section 1. 



Digitized by Google 



SHIELDS OF ARMS. 



ROBRRT DE ( HAN DOS 



PERCY 




HOBKKT OK VKItE. 




UK WAKHKNNK 



UK »ARR£*M1C 




IS? B 



•4 % 



Digitized by Google 



Digitized by Google 



MISCELfl/ANEOUS CHARGES. 
INANIMATE OBJECTS. 




No. 128.— Admiralty Flag. 



CHAPTER IX. 

MISCELLANEOUS CHARGES. 

PART I. — INANIMATE OBJECT8. 

With the view to place in the simplest manner before students 
of Heraldry the various objects and figures that are charged 
upon Heraldic Shields, I have arranged in Classified Groups 
these different Charges, only excluding such as are too simple, 
and too well known in their non-heraldic capacity, to require 
any specific notice when the Herald summons them to appear 
and act at his bidding. 

All Descriptive Terms I have placed in a separate group. 
So also all Heraldic Titles and Terms that are neither simply 
descriptive, nor the names of Charges, form a group by them- 
selves. In each Group the terms are placed and treated after 
the manner of an Heraldic Glossary. 

THE PRINCIPAL INANIMATE OBJECTS. 

Anchor : — appears as a Charge in Heraldry. It is borne with 
a cable, set fesse-wise, all of gold, on a red Flag, by the British 
Admiralty; No. 128. 

Angenne: — a six-leaved flower, or six foil ; No. 244, PL XIII. 

Annulet ;— a ring, plain, and of any size; No. 129, PL VIII.; 
No. 454, PL XL. ; and No. 440, PL L. In Cadency, the Annulet 



Digitized by Google 



40 



MISCELLANEOUS CHARGES. 



is the Difference of the Fifth Son j No. 383, PL XII. Tlio 
Annulet is sometimes blazoned as a False Koundlo. 

Arrow:— tins missile, when homo as a Charge, is blazoned 
as armed, and feathered or flighted. A bundle of arrows is 
entitled a Sheaf; No. 120 a, Plate VIII., from tho monument 
of Arthur Tudor at Worcester. 

Axe : — see Hatchet. 

Ball : — a spherical Roundle. 

Banner .-—borne by Sir. R. Bannerman ; No. 129 b, PL VIII. 
Bar « — on© of tho Ordinaries ; No. 35. 
Barnacles .-—see Brcys. 

Barrulet : — a diminutive of the Bar. See Chap. V. 
Baton :— a diminutive of the Bend Sinister, couped at its 
oxtremities : see Chap. V. 

Battering Bam .-—borne by the Earl of Abingdon; No. 129 c, 

PL vm. 

Beacon :— an iron case containing somo inflammable substance 
in active combustion, set on tho top of a pole, against which a 
ladder is also placed ; No. 130. It was a badgo of Henry V., 
and appears on his monument at Westminster: seo Chap. 
XIX., Section IV. It is also a Badge of tho Comptons : seo 
Chap. XVII., Section 1. 

Bell .-—borne by tho name Bell. This Shield is at Canterbury. 

Bend .-—one of the Ordinaries ; No. 38. 

Bend Sinister .—see Chap. V. 

Bendlet :— a diminutive of tho Bend : see Chap. V. 

Bezant :— a plain flat golden Disc, or Koundle, No. 50, sup- 
posed to be derived from tho gold coins found by the Crusaders 
to have been current at Byzantium. 

Billet :—an oblong square of any Tincture ; No. Ill, PL IV. 

Bird-bolt : — an arrow with a blunt head. 

Book: borne both open and closed; Nos. 000, 601, PL 

XLVI1. 

Bordure ;— No. 1 13. See p. 33 ; also Chap. XV. 



Digitized by Google 



MISCELLANEOUS CHARGES. 



41 



Botvnte, and BotonSe Fitchcc ;— a Cross, having its arms ter- 
minating in trefoils; Nos. 87, 88, PL III., and 388 E, PL XL VIII. 
Seo Treflee. 

Bourdon :— a Palmers Staff; No. 158 a, PL LXIX. 

Breys: — barnacles for a horse's nose, used in breaking the 
animal. This Charge appears on the shields of tho brothers 
1)e Geneville, in the Roll of Henry III. ; also in tho stained glass 
at Dorchester, &amp;c. ; No. 131, PL VIII., and No. 131 a, PL XIV. 

Brizure : — a Difference or .Mark of Cadency. 

Buckle : — the common ihstrument for fastening, which is borno 
in Heraldry both separately and attached to straps, as in tho arms 
of the Peleams ; Nos. 132, PL VIII. and 132 a, PL XL1X., also 
No. 460. In the thirteenth century, Thomas Rocelane or Rocelyn, 
bore, gu., three buckles arg. ; No. 132 b, PL XLLX. 

Burgonet : — a variety of Helmet, worn principally in the six- 
teenth century. 

Caltrop, or Qaltrap : — a ball of iron, from which four long and 
sharp spikes project in such a mannor, that when tho Caltrap 
lies on tho ground, one spike is always erect. It was used in 
war to maim horses ; No. 133, PL VIII. 

Canton :— No. 90, PL IV. 

Carbuncle, or Escarbunclc : — in Heraldry, a figure formed by 
a rose, from which issue eight rays of sceptre-like form and 
character; these rays are sometimes united both at their ex- 
tremities, and again midway between their extremities and tho 
central rose. It appears upon the shield of Geoffrey de 
Mandeville, Earl of Essex, in the effigy attributed to him in 
tho Temple Church, tho date being about a.d. 1160. This 
example, however, is earlier than the period in which any 
peculiar heraldic chargos can be considered to have assumed 
definite and recognized forms. A device which in its general 
aspect resembles the Escarbunclc constitutes the arms of Na- 
varre (it superseded the silver cross ujxm blue about a.i&gt;. 1200), 
aud it i« charged upon tho Royal Shield of Henry IV., by 



Digitized by Google 



42 



MISCELLANEOUS CHARGES. 



impalement, as the ensign of Queen* Joanna of Navarre; Nos. 
134, 134 a, 323, 335 a, 348, Pis. VIII., XVIIL, and XXIII. See 
Navarre, in Chap. XXX III. 

Castle :— a turrettod and embattled military edifice, generally 
triple-towered. It is the well-known heraldic device of Castile, 
borne by Alianore, Queen of Edward I. ; No. 135, PI. L, and 
No. 135 a, PI. VIII. 

Chamfron : — armour for a horse's head. 

Chaplet :— an entwined wreath : see Garland. 

Chess-rook : — one of the pieces used in the game of Chess ; 
Nos. 130, 448, Plates VIII. and XL. Borne by the name Roke- 
woode : borne also in the thirteenth century by Simon le Fitz- 
Simon, gu., three chess-rooks erm. ; No. 13G c, PI. LXIX. 

Chevron : — one of the Ordinaries ; No. 40. 

Chevronel : — a diminutive of the Chevron ; No. 40 a. 

Cliief : — one of the Ordinaries ; No. 33. 

Cinque-foil, or Quintefo'd :— a figure formed after the fashion of 
a five-leaved grass; No. 136 a, PI. VIII. ; see also PI. XVI. 

Civic Crown :— a wreath of oak leaves and acorns. 

Clarion : — this charge is also called a Rest, and occasionally a 
Sufflue, or a Claricord or Clavicord. It most probably is the 
heraldic representation of the ancient musical instrument called 
a 44 Clarion," possibly a species of "Pandean Pipe." It was 
borne in the arms of Neath Abbey, and was apparently a Rebus- 
Badge of the De Clares. It is now borne for the name Gran- 
ville; Nos. 136 b, and 137, PI. VIII. 

Closet : — a diminutive of the Bar : see Chap. V. 

Comb : — borne for the name Ponsonby. 

Cotise, or Couste : — a diminutive of the Bend : see Chap. V. 

Couple-Close : — half a Chevronel : see Chap. V. 

Crampette: — the ornament at the end of a sword-scabbard. 

Crancclin :— See Saxony, in Chap. XXXII. 

Cross . —one of the Ordinaries. See Chap. VI. 

Crozier .* — ^cc Pastoral Staff. 



Digitized by Google 



MISCELLANEOUS CHARGES. 43 

Crou-Croadetc—Ko. 83, PL III. 

Cup, or Covered Cup:— No. 137 a, PL VIII., from the Slab of 
John le Botilkr, about a.d. 1300; and the Brass to Judge 
Martyn, a.d. 1436, Graveney, Kent. 

Cushion, or Pillow (Orciller) : — usually of a square form, with 
a tassel at each corner, borne by the Kirkpatricks ; No. 138. 
The Cushions represented beneath the heads of mediaeval effigies 
are often richly diapered, and it is common for the upper of two 
cushions to be set lozenge wise upon the lower; as in No. 138 a, 
PI. XV., from the De Bohun Brass, Westminster. 

Dagger : — a short sword, called a 44 Misericorde," and in 
military monumental effigies worn on the right side. 

Dancette, or Da nse .- — sometimes used by early Heralds to 
denote a Fesse Dancette. It occurs in this acceptation in the 
Roll of Caerlaverock. 

Degrees .-—steps. 

Endorse :— a diminutive of the Pale : see Chap. V. 

Estoile :— a star, having six, or sometimes eight, or more wavy 
points or rays ; No. 140. See Mullet. 

False Cross, False Escutcheon, False Round! e : — a Cross voided, 
an Orle and an Annulet. 

Fan: — a winnowing implement used in husbandry ; No. 141, 
PL VIII. It appears charged upon the Shield, the Surcoat and 
the Ailettes of Sir R. De Sevass, in his Brass at Chartham, 
Kent, about a.d. 1305 ; also upon a Shield in the Cloisters at 
Canterbury. 

Fer-deMoline . —see Mill rind. 

Fermaile, plural Fermaux .-—a buckle. 

Ferr : — a horse-shoe. 

Fesse : — one of the Ordinaries ; No. 34, PI. II. 

Fetter lock :— a shackle and padlock; No. 142, PI. VIII. It 
was the Badge of Edmond Plantagenet, of Langlfly, fifth son 
of Edward III.; and of his great-grandson, Edward IV. It 
appears, charged on a shield, in the Brass of Sir Svmon de PfiL- 



Digitized by Google 



44 MISCELLANEOUS CHARGES. 

BRIQOE, K.G., Banner bearer to Richard II., a.d. 1416, at Folbrig, 
in Norfolk ; also, it forms a diaper in tho stainod glass of the 
north window of the great transept at Canterbury. 

File : — a Label, apparently from JUum, a narrow riband. 

Fillet: — a diminutive of a Chief; see Chap. V. 

Flagon : — borne by De Montbourchier, No. 4G4, PL LI. 

Flanchcs and Flasqucs :— Nos. 108, 108 a, and 622. 

Fountain :— No. 56, Pi V. 

Fourchec : — a modification of tho Cross Molino ; No. 82, PL III. 

Frette No. 106, PI. IV: 

Fusil :— a narrow Lozenge ; No. 105. 

Fylfot:— No. 143, PI. VIII. It is supposed to bo a mystic 
symbol. It occurs in Brasses at Kerasing, Leuknor, Oakham, 
Shottesbrooko, and Morton Chapel, Oxford. 

Gads, or Gadlyngs : — small spikes projecting from tho knuckles 
of mediasval gauntlets. In some instances, small figures in 
metal woro substituted for tho spikes, as in the gauntlets of tho 
Black Prince, still preserved at Canterbury, which have small 
gilt lions for gadlyngs. 

Galley : — see Lymphad. 

Garde-bras : — armour to defend the elbow ; See No. 695. 

Garland :— a wreath, whether of loaves only, or of flowers and 
leaves intermixed. Garlands are quartered upon tho banners 
that are sculptured on tho monument of Lord Bourciiier, bannor- 
bearer of Henry V., at Westminster. They are also blazoned 
upon the- banner itself, harry argent and azure, of Ralph de Fitz 
William, in the Caorl. Roll ; No. 432, PI. XLIX. 

Gauntlet : — an armed glove ; No. 145, PI. VIII. 

Gemellcs, or Bars GemeUes: — barruleta placed togothor in 
couples ; No. 44, PI. II. 

Gimmel-Ring .-—two annulets interlaced. 

Globe, thi Terrestrial, or Sphere : — borne in his arms by Sir 
II. Drvdex, and in the Cresta of the Hopes and the Drakes; 
Now. 144 a, 144 it, PI. XXVI. 



Digitized by Google 



MISCELLANEOUS CHARGES. 



45 



Gorge, or Gurge .-—No. 146, PI. VIII., supposed to indicato a 
whirlpool. It appears in the Roll of H. III., borne by K. de Gorges. 
Greece* : — steps. 

GiUtee: — see Chap. XII., and Nob. 250, 251. 
Gyron No. 97, PL IV. 
Hackle:— see Hemp-brake. 

Hames, or Heames .-—part of a horse's harness ; a badgo of the 
St. John's. 

Hammer, or Mattel : — an early charge. John de Martell, in 
the thirteenth century, bore, sa., three Itammers org. ; No. 14G a, 
PI. LXIX. ; in the example the charges are drawn from a re- 
markable military effigy of the period, at Great Malvern : heraldic 
hammers are also sculptured upon an equally remarkable effigy 
of a lady at Selby, in Yorkshire. 

Harp .-—the national Device of Ireland ; No. 537 a : seo Notes 
and Queries, 1st Series, XII., 328, 350. 

Hatchet ;— an early charge. Thus, in tho 13th ccntury,WM. de 
Hursthelve bore, az., three hatchets org. ; No. 146 b, PI. LXIX. 

Hawlcs-lure : — a decoy used by falconers, and composed of two 
wings with their tips downwards, joined with a lino and ring ; 
No. 147, PI. IX. 

Hawk's bells and jesses: — bells, with the leather straps for 
fastening them to tho hawk's legs ; borne on a chevron by Baron 
Llanover; No. 148. 

Helm, Heaumc, Helmet :— defensive armour for tho hoad. This 
charge is variously modified, in accordance with tho varieties of 
tho early head-pieces. Thus, tho Earl of Cardigan bears three 
morions, or steel caps, while tho Marquis of Cholmondeley bears, 
with a garbe, two helmets. In the thirteenth century, John 
Daubeny bore, sa., three helms org.; No. 144, PI. LXIX. Seo 
Helm, Chap. XIV. 

Hempbracke, or Hackle : — a serrated instrument, formerly used 
for bruising hemp; borno by Sir G. F. HAMP80N, Paronet ; 
No. 149, PI. IX. 



Digitized by Google 



40 



MISCELLANEOUS CHARGES. 



Horse-shoe : — a charge borno in the arms of the Ferrers, Earls 
of Derby, who appear to have derived it from the Marshals. 
When the Earls Ferrers changed their shield to vairee or and 
gti. y they placed their golden horse-shoes upon a bordure azure; 
No. 403, Plate LI. Sometimes blazoned a Ferr. 

Hunting-horn :— a curved horn, the crest of De Bryenne; 
No. 267, Plate XXVI. When it has a belt or baudrick, it is 
said to be stringed ; No. ] 50, PI. IX. 

Hurte : — a blue roundle ; No. 52, PI. II. 

Javelin :— a short barbed spear. 

Jesses : —straps for hawks' bells. 

Key : — borne in the arms of several of the Bishops and others. 
Knot .—see Chap. XVII., Section 4. 

Isabel : — a narrow riband or bar, having three, four, or five 
pendants or points : it is always borne in chief, and should 
extend across the Field; No. 112, PI. IV. The Label is the 
Difference which distinguishes an Eldest Son, except in Royal 
Cadency. See Chaps. XV., XVI., and XIX., Section 7. A Label 
is sometimes borne as a sole Charge : and in Foreign Heraldry 
Labels of a single point or of six points occasionally appear : see 
Chap. XXXII. ; see also p. 33. 

Leash : — a strap, or other similar coupling or fastening. 

letters of the Alphabet are sometimes used as Charges. 

Lozenge : — No. 104. The arms of an unmarried lady and of a 
widow are placed upon a Lozenge, and not on a Shield. 

Lure .-—see Hawlcs-lure. 

Lymphad : — a galley of early times, having one mast, but also 
propelled by oars. It is blazoned with its sail furled, and with 
its colours flying. The Lymphad is borne by the Duke of 
Argyll and tho Marquis of Abercorn. It was also the device of 
the Macdonalds, the Lords of Lorn, and it appears repeatedly 
upon their monumental memorials at Iona; No. 151, PI. IX. 

Manehe, or Mannche .*— a sleeve having long pendant ends, 
worn in the time of Henry I. It has been borne from an early 



Digitized by Google 



MISCELLANEOUS CHARGES. 47 

■ 

period by the family of Hastings. The prevalent modes of 
representing the Maunche in Heraldry are shown in Nos. 152, 
152 a, PL IX., and No. 338 A, Chap. XIV. 
Mattel : — a Hammer. 

Mascle : — a voided Lozenge; Nos. 109, 441, 442. 

Mill-rind, or Fer-de-Moline : — the iron affixed to the centre of 
a mill-stone; No. 153. It is a modification of the Cross Moline, 
No. 75, which in a Roll of Edward I. is styled a Fer-de-Moline : 
thus Guy Ferre bears, gu., a fer-de moline org., over all a 
bendlet az. ; No. 153 a. It is also the bearing of De Molines, 
or Molyneux. 

Mitre : — This episcopal ensign is borne in the arms of the Sees 
of Norwich, Chester, Llandaff, Meath, and others : see Mitre in 
Chap. XIII. A Mitre is the Crest of the Berkkleys. 

Moline : — a cross terminating like a Mill-rind ; No. 75. 

Morion : — a steel cap. 

Morse : — a clasp, usually onriched with varied ornamentation. 
Mortier : — a cap of estate. 

Mount : — the base of a shield, when made to represent a 
hillock, and tinctured vert. 

Mullet:— a, star of five points or rays, all formed by right 
lines, as No. 154. This Charge is also borne with six, or eight, 
or even more points, but the rays are always straight, and thus 
the Mullet essentially differs from the Estoile,- the rays of which 
are always wavy. When they exceed five in number, the rays 
of the Mullet must be specified; thus, No. 155 is a Mullet of 
six points. See also No. 127, PI. VI. This favourite Charge, 
so well known in the first quarter of the shield of the De 
Veres, No. 156, PI. VI. (Quarterly gu. and or, a Mullet org.), 
may be regarded as representing the Rowel of a Spur, and it is 
often pierced, No. 157 (to bo indicated in blazon), as if to 
exhibit the adjustment of the rowel to its axis. A pierced 
mullet, which appears to demonstrate conclusively the deriva- 
tion of this Charge from a pointed spur-ronelle, appears as the 



Digitized by Google 



48 



MISCELLANEOUS CHARGES. 



crost of Sir John Dauiiyqne, upon his monumental slab at 
Norton Briso, Oxfordshire, A.n. 1345; No. 408. In Cadency, 
the Mullet is the difference of the Third Son. See Plates 
XXVIII. and XXXVII. 
Ogress : — a Pellet. 

Ordinaries : — the nine primary simple Charges of Heraldry : 
see Chap. V. 

Orciller : — a cushion or pillow. 

Orle:— No. 100, PL IV. : see p. 31. 

Padlock:— &amp; Badgo of John of Ghent, Duke of Lancaster. 

Pale : — one of the Ordinaries j No. 3G, PI. II. 

Pall: — an archi-episcopal vestment, worn by the Roman 
hierarchy, and indicative of the order and rank of Archbishops. 
In Ileraldry, tho Pall^ of which one half only is displayed, in 
form closely resembles tho letter Y, and it is always charged 
with crosses patios fitchces. It is borne in the arms of tho 
archi-episcopal sees of Canterbury, Armagh, and Dublin; 
No. 255. As a vestment, the Pall is a narrow circular band of 
white lamb's-wool, which is adjusted about the shoulders, and 
has two similar bands hanging down from it, the one before, 
and tho other behind. It is clearly shown in the Effigies and 
Brassos of Archbishops at Canterbury, York, Westminster, Oxford, 
and elsewhere ; in the early Effigies and Brasses of Ecclesiastics 
not of episcopal rank, it is frequently represented in embroidery 
upon the Chesuble, as in the sculptured Effigy at Beverley, and in 
the incised Brasses at St. Alban's, North Mimms, and Wensley ; 
No. 158, PL IX. See ArcJibishop, Chap. XIIJ. 

Pallet :— a diminutive of the Pale : seo Chap. V. 

Palmer's Staff, or Pilgrims Staff, in French Heraldry, Bour- 
don : — an early Charge. This device appears on a slab at Halt- 
whistle. In ono of the earliest Rolls, John Bourdon bears, arg. y 
three Palmer's Staves gu. ; No. 158 A, PI. LXIX. 

Pastoral Staff:— the official staff of a Bishop or Abbot, having 
u crooked head, No. 159, PL XV., and thus is distinguished from 



Digitized by Google 



MISCELLANEOUS CHARGES. 



40 



an Archbishop's Crozicr, the head of which is cruciform, No. 100, 
PL XV. (See Crazier in Chap. XIII.) A VexiUum, or scarf, 
hangs from almost all representations of the Pastoral Staff, 
encircling its shaft. The earlier examples are generally very 
plain ; bnt the custom of richly adorning this staff was prevalent 
also from an early period. The enamelled staff of Bishop 
William of Wykebam, preserved in New College, Oxford, is a 
splendid specimen of tho second half of the fourteenth century. 
The Pastoral Staff is borne in the arms of Westminster Abbey, 
No. 599, PI. XLVII. ; in those of the See of Llandaff, &amp;c. See 
Bishop in Chap. XIII. 

Patce, or Formee :-a variety of the Cross ; No. 85, PL III. 

Patee, or Formte Fitctec :— a similar Cross, pointed at tho foot ; 
No. 86, PL III. 

Patonce: — a Cross, of which tho four arms expand in curves 
from the centre, and tho ends arc foliated ; No. 77, PI. III. 

Patriarchal .-—a Cross which has its head crossed horizontally ; 
No. 68, PL III. 

Pauldron : — armour to defend the shoulder. 

Pellet : — a black spherical roundle ; No. 54, PI. II. 

Penner and Inkhorn:—* pen-caso and vessel containing ink, 
as they wore carried in tho Middle Ages by Notaries, appended 
to their girdles No. 161, PI. IX. The Penner and Inkhorn 
are represented in two Brasses of Notaries, a.d. 1475 and 1566, 
preserved in the Church of St. Mary Tower, Ipswich ; in a 
monument in Oxford Cathedral, about a.d. 1503 ; and in a very 
interesting monumental slab, at Sawley Abbey, Lancashire. 
Other early examples have also been noticed. 

Pheon .-—the barbed head of a spear or arrow, No. 162. Un- 
less the contrary be specified, the point of the Pheon is blazoned 
to the base, as in the arms of the Earl Brown low, and the Baron 
De L'Isle. 

Pickaxe, or Pic .—an early Charge, borne by a De Pickworth : 
Roll of Edward III. 

E 



Digitized by Google 



50 



MISCELLANEOUS CHARGES 



Pile:— No. 41. 
Pillow .-—see Cushion. 
Pitcher :— see Flagon. 

Plate .—a silver or white flat roundle ; No. 51. 

Playing Tables :— a chess-board. 

Pw'n/* : — the pendants of a Label. 

Pommc :— a green spherical roundle ; No. 55. 

Pommee ;— a form of Cross; No. 81. 

Portcullis :— a defence for a gateway, formed of transverse bars 
bolted together, the vertical bars terminating in base in pheons. 
In Heraldry, a Portcullis is always represented as having rings 
at its uppermost angles, from which chains depend on either 
side ; No. 163, PI. IX. This charge is the well-known Badge of 
the Beauforts, and through them of the Tudor Princes : it is 
borne in tho arms of Westminster City, No. 607, PI. XL VII., and 
of Ulster King-of-Arms, No. 606, PI. XLVI. See also Herald. 

Purse: — represented as worn in the middle ages suspended 
from the girdle. The badge of Cromwell of Tateshall. 

Quadrate .-—squared ; a form of the Cross ; No. 72, PI. III. 

Quarter : the first quarter of the Shield, now superseded in 

use by the Canton. 

Quarter-Pierced, and Quarterly-Pierced .—Nos. 73, 74., PI. III. 

Quatrefoil :— a figure formed of four curved leaves. In archi- 
tecture, a Quatrefoil within a circle, or a square, or a lozenge 
panel, very commonly contains an heraldic shield ; as in Nos. 

164, and 164 b, PI. XV. 

Rainbow .--borne with their Crest by the Hopes; No. 144 a, 

PI. XXVI. 

Rapier :— a narrow stabbing sword. 

Bays: when drawn round a figure of the disc of the sun, 

heraldic rays are sixteen in number, and they are alternately 

straight and wavy. 

BecerceUe .-—curled ; a form of the Cross ; No. 76, PI. III. 

Rest : —see Clarion. 



Digitized by Google 



MISCELLANEOUS CHANGES. 



51 



Riband :— a diminutive of the Bend. See Chap. VI. 
Roundle, or Bandelet :— a circular Charge, which, when of metal, 
is flat, but when of colour, spherical. See Chap. V. 
Rustre:— No. 110, PI. IV. 

Sallire .-—one of the Ordinaries ; Nos. 39, 49, PI. II. 
Scaling-Ladder .—No. 1G4 a. The Crest of the Greys. 




No. 164 a. — Scaling-Ladder. 

Scarpe : — a diminutive of the Bend Sinister. 

Seax : — a Saxon weapon, or scimetar, having a curved notch 
cut off the back of it near the point ; No. 165, PL IX. It is 
borne in the arms of the County of Middlesex. 

Seruse, or Cerise : — a Torteau. 

ShacMe-bolt :— see Fetter-Lock. 

Shake-fork: — a Charge resembling a Pall, but humettee, and 
pointed; No. 166, PI. IX. It is borne by the Marquess of 

CONYN'GHAM. 

Shield : — a shield is sometimes borne as a Charge : thus the 
Hays bear, Argent, three shields gules; No. 167, p. 54; and a 
single shield (or inescutcheon) appears in the well-known 
blazon of the Mortimers, Nos. 99, and 99 a, p. 31. In the Roll 
of H. III., Warin de Monchesney bears, or, Oiree shields hairy 
vair and gu. % No. 447, PI. XLVIII. : and in the Second Boll of 
the same era, John Fitz Simon bears, gu., three shields org., 
reversing the tinctures of the Hays. In addition to their 
habitual use as architectural accessories in every variety of 
early Gothic edifice, Shields of arms, in the Middle Ages, 
were often employed as decorative accessories of costume ; 

b2 



Digitized by Google 



52 



MISCELT. A NFOUS OH A KO KS. 



thus the surcoat of Wimjam BE Valence, a.i&gt;. 1200, at West- 
minster, tho Brass of Margaret Lady Camoys, a. p. 1310, at 
Trotton, Sussex, and the effigy of a Lady at Worcester of tho 
period of Edward I., arc decorated with small Shields of Anns. 
Nino of these shields, originally enamelled, have been taken 
within a few years from the Trotton Brass. For various exam- 
ples of early Shields, see Chap. III. 

Ship :— besides the ancient Galley, ships of a more modem 
character appear amongst tho Charges of Heraldry : thus, tho 
anns of tho Corporation of the Trinity House are, four Ships 
under mil gules, cantoned by a Cross of St. George ; No. 108. 

Spear: — borne on a bend by Shakespere ; No. G70, PI. LX1X. 

Spur: — this knightly appointment, which from its associa- 
tions claims the special regard of tho Herald, was worn with a 
single goad-liko point, and known as tho 4&lt; Pryck-Spur," No. 
169, PI. IX., before the reign of Edward II. About a.d. 1320, 
tho Spur having a Wheel began to supersede tho earlier form, 
No. 170: and, shortly after, tho true Bouelle Spur, having the 
wheel spiked, made its appearance, No. 171. Tho examples 
that I have given in Nos. 100, 170, 171, and 172, are from the 
effigies of John of Eltham ; of a Knight at Clehongro, Here- 
fordshire; of the Black Trince; and of Richard Delamere, 
Esq., Hereford. In tho beginning of tho fifteenth century 
spurs appear sometimes to have been worn with Guards to 
their Rouelles ; as in No. 172. In tho middlo of that century 
they became of extravagant length, but towards its close they 
assumed a more sensible form. See Mullet. 

Staple :— an iron fastening, a Badge of tho Stapleto.vs. 

Steel-cap : —a close-fitting defence for tho head. 

Stirrup : — this characteristic Charge is of comparatively rare 
occurrence. Gu., three stirrups leathered and buckled or, were borne 
by Scudamore ; and the same composition on an azure field forms 
tho arms of Gifford. This shield is carved in tho vaulting of 
the Canterbury Cloisters. A Spur erect between a pair of Wings 



Digitized by Google 



MISCELLANEOUS CHARGES. 
INANIMATE OBJECTS &amp; BADGE OF ULSTER. 




Digitized by Google 



M ISCELLA N KOUS CHARGES. 



53 



was tho Crest of the Marquess of Annandale, a Lord Marcher of 
the olden time. 

Swivel: — two iron links connected by a bolt, around which 
they revolve: borne by the Ironmongers' Company. 

Sioord:— tho Knightly Weapon of all ages, in Heraldry is 
represented unsheathed, straight in tho Blade, and pointed. In 
blazon, the Hilt, Pommel, and Accoutrements of Swords are 
always to be specified. Swords are borne in tho Arms of the 
Sees of London, Winchester, Exeter, and Cork. A Sword erect 
also is cantoned by the Cross of St. George in tho first quarter, 
in the Anns of the City of London ; and in this instance the 
weapon represents the emblem of St. Paul, the patron Saint of 
Loudon, No. 139, p. 54. Tho Earl Poulett now bears, — Sa, 
three Swords in pile org., their points in base, hilts and pommels or, 
No. 173, PI. XIV. 

Target :— a circular Shield, represented in the. curious armed 
effigy of the period of Hknry III., at Great Malvern. 

Tau : — a Cross resembling tho letter T, called also tho Cross 
of St Anthony; No. 59, PI. III. See Chap. XX., 3. 

TJtrcstle : a three-legged stool. 

Tilting Spear :— a heavy lance. Sec Spear. 

Torch : — generally borne inflamed, or lighted. 

Tirrsc : — a wreath. 

Turteau, plural Torteaux : — A red spherical Roundle. 

Tower :— a small Castle ; No. 173 a, PI. IX. 

Treflce :— tho same as Botonec, — trefoilcd, that is. 

Treille, or Treliisc : — lattice-work. It differs from Frette, and 
Fretiee, in that tho pieces do not interlace under and over, but 
cross each other in such a manner that all the pieces from the 
dexter are in the same plane, and they lio over those from tho 
sinister, and they all are fastened by nails at the crossings. 
A Treille is said to be clotue of its Nails; No. 174, PI. IX. 

Trcssurc : —one of the Subordinates. See Tressure, p. 32, and 
No. Kt2, PI. IV. It is commonly blazoned tmfleurie. The ROYAL 



Digitized by Google 



54 



MISCELLANEOUS CHARGES. 



Tressure of Scotland is blazoned as a Double Treasure, fleurie 
counter fleurie ; No. 103, PL V. 

Trumpet:— in Horaldiy, a long straight tube, expanding to- 
wards its extremity : it is well exemplified in the Brass to Sir 
Roger i&gt;e Trumpixgdon ; Nos. 175, PI. IX., and 375, PI. XLVIIL 

Tun :— a cask. It occurs constantly to represent the syllable 
ton in a Rebus upon some name ending in that syllable : thus, 
at St. John's, Cambridge, the Rebus of Asiiton is an ash-tree 
growing out of a tun ; in .Bristol Cathedral, Abbot Burton's Rebus, 
a burr plant growing out of a tun, is carved in several places ; and 
again, a tun pierced by an arrow or bolt frequently occurs as the 
Rebus of Bolton. See Rebus in Chap. XI II. 

Voir .-—one of the Furs ; Nos. 21), 30, p. 20. 

Vanibrace : — armour for the fore-arm. 

Vamplate :— a guard for the hand upon a tilting-spear. 

Verities : — concentric rings or annulets. 

Vervels, or Varvels .-—small rings. 

Water-Bouget : — a vessel used by medieval soldiers for carry- 
ing water. It is borne by the Baron De Ros, and by tho 
Bourciiiers. Two modifications of the form of this Charge 
are shown in No. 176, PI. IX. See also No. 338 a, in Chap. 
XIV. On the shield of a crossed-legged knight in the Temple 
Church, which is attributed to a De Ros, three water-bougets 
are very boldly sculptured ; the effigy is of tho period of Ed- 
ward I. : and again, good later examples appear on tho banners 
that are represented in the monument of Louis Robsakt, Lord 
Bourchier, the standard-bearer of Henry V., at Westminster. 

Winnouring-Fan : — boo Fan. 




V.. 189.— Lam*. No. ir.7.— Hay. 



Digitized by Google 




No. 1 S3.— The Percy Lion. No. ISO. — The Howabd Lion. 



CHAPTER X. 

M 1SCKLL A N EOUS CHARGES. 

TAUT 1 1. — A NIM ATE BEINGS. 

This Group of Charges comprises, with a varied series of 
Creatures that exist in Nature, several others that are indebted 
for their shadowy existence only to the poetic imagination of 
the early Heralds. Those Tarts of the Bodies of Animals also, 
which constitute distinct Heraldic Charges, I havo associated 
with the Creatures themselves ; and the whole havo been sub- 
jected to a classified arrangement. 

1. Human Beings occasionally appear in heraldic composi- 
tions, in which case the blazon always expresses with consistent 
distinctness the attitude, costume, action, &amp;c, of every figure. 
Human figures, however, generally occur as Supporters, or 
Crests ; and Parts of the human body aro more frequently 
introduced than actual Figures. 

Human figures appear in the arms of the Sees of Salisbury, 
Chichester, Lincoln, Clogher, and Waterford. In the 
Arms of the See of Oxford are three demi-figures. The Head 
and the Hands of a man, when they appear as Charges, must 
be so blazoned as to define and describe their position, &amp;c, 
Thus, a head would be in profile, or affrontee, or reguardant, or 



Digitized by Google 



06 MISCELLANEOUS CHARGES. 

• 

uncovered, or helmed, &amp;c. ; and the Hand would bo either tho 
Dexter, or tho Sinister, or erect, or grasping some object, &amp;c. ; 
an open hand is said to be appaumee. Tho same would be 
the case with an Arm, which, when bent at tho elbow, is cm- 
bowed, &amp;c. The very singular armorial ensign of the Isle of 
Man, now quartered by the Duke of Atuol. is thus blazoned : 
Gules, three Legs armed proper, conjoined in the Fcsse point at 
tlte upper part of the thighs, flexed in a triangle, garnished and 
spurred or ; No. 170 a, PL XIV. : this example is drawn from a 
Roll of Edward L, preserved in the Heralds' College. See Isle 
of Man in Chap. XXXIII. Archbishop Juxon, who died a.d. 1G63, 
bore— Or, a Cross gu., between four Blackamoors' Heads, couped at 
the shoulders ppr., wreathed a' out the temples of the field. Tho same 
Charge is bomo by the Earl Canning. Tho Badge of Ulster, 
tho distinctive Ensign of the Order and Bank of Baronets, 
instituted in 1612, by James I., the ancient armorial Ensign of 
the Irish Kingdom of Ulster, is thus blazoned, upon a small 
shield — arg., a Sinister Handy couped at tite wrist and erect, gu. ; 
No. 177, PL IX. 

Inseparably associated with their historic name, the Dou- 
glases bear, as the armorial insignia of their house, Arg., a 
human Heart gu., imperially crowned ppr. ; on a Chief az., three 
Mullets of the field. The royal Heart was that of Kobert Bruce, 
which tho M Good Sir Jamios Douglas" was carrying to the Holy 
Land, that ho might bury it at Jerusalem, when he himself fell 
in battle with tho Saracens of Andalusia, AM, 13130. The crown 
is a comparatively recent addition to the original Charge ; No. 
177 a, PI. XIV. See Arms of Douglas, Chap. XXXIII. 

II. The Heraldry of the Lion. The King of Beasts is 
the animal which, as a Charge of Heraldry, has always been 
held in the very highest estimation, lie appears in heraldic 
Blazonry under the most varied conditions, and in association 
with almost every other device. I have considered it to be 



Digitized by Google 



HERAI/DRY OF THE 1/1 OK. 




Digitized by Google 



MISCELLANEOUS CHARGE*. 



57 



desirable, accordingly, to assign to the 44 Heraldry of the Lion," 
a distinct section of its own. 

The Lion was not only the favourite Beast with the early 
Heralds, but also almost the only one that they introduced into 
their blazon. And they considered that the natural and proper 
attitude for their lions was rampant — erect, looking intently 
before them towards their prey, and preparing to make their 
formidable spring. To the Lion in tbis attitude, accordingly, 
the early Heralds applied his true title, and they blazoned 
him as "a Lion." But, when ho was to bo represented as 
in the act of walking, whether with his head in profile or 
looking outwards from the shield, whether simply passant or 
jxuisant guardant, they entitled the royal beast a " Lion-leoparde" 
a " Lion Leopard," or simply a " Leopard" Hence tho Lions ok 
England are found to have been habitually blazoned as Leopards 
(" Lupards" 11 Leoparts") until tho fifteenth century was far 
advanced ; then, at length, the Lion of Heraldry, whatever fail 
attitude and his action, received his true name, which he has 
retained under all circumstances until our own times. In tho 
Holl of Arms of Henry III. the first entry is, " Le Roy d Angleierre 
parte goulcs trots lupards d"or so, again, tho statute of Eow. I. 
(a.d. 1300, 28 E. I., cap. 20) ordains that all pieces of gold and 
silver plato, when assayed, should be " signee de une teste de 
Icopart" — marked, that is, with the head of the King's Lion- 
leoparde. 

The Lion is borno in heraldic Compositions emblazoned in 
fourteen varieties of attitude. 

1. The Lion Passant, No. 178, PL X., is walking, and has three 
of his paws placed on the ground, the fourth (one of the fore 
paws) being raised up.» He looks in tho direction that he is 
walking, which, unless the contrary be specified, is towards 
the Doxter. This Lion was borno by the L'Esiranges, No. 6(50, 
PL LXII., and tho CAKCWS, and it is now charged upon a Fesse 
by the Earl of Cauysfort. 



Digitized by Google 



58 



M1SCKLLANK0US CHARGLS. 



2. The Lion Passant Guardant, No. 179, differs from the 
Lion Passant, in the circumstance that ho is affronU— looking 
out from the shield at the spectator. A Golden Lion Passant 
Guardant, upon a Field gules, is a Lion of England ; No. 198. 

3. The Lion Passant Reguardant, is walking in the same 
manner and towards the same direction as No. 179, but he 
looks back to the Sinister; No. 179 a, PI. X. 

4. The Lion Rampant, No. 180, stands erect on his two hind 
legs, but has only ono of his fore legs elevated. 

The Scottish Lion is Rampant, his Tincture being gules, on 
a field or : No. 103, Pi V., and Plates XXII., LVIII., and L1X. : 
thus, Sir Walter Scott, speaking of the Royal Banner of Scot- 
land, says that upon it 

" The ruddy lion ramps in gold." 

5. The Lion Rampant Guardant, No. 181, is the same as 
the Lion Rampant, except that he is affronte, instead of looking 
before him. The Dexter Supporter of England is such a Lion, 
of gold. This is the habitual attitude of Lions when they are 
Supportors. 

0. The Lion Rampant Reguardant, No. 182, looks behind 
him. Such Lions are the Supporters of the Barons Braybrokk 
and Brownlow. 

7. The Lion Salient, No. 183, is in the act of making his 
spring, erect, with both his fore paws elevated. 

8. Two Lions Combaltant, No. 184, are Rampant and face to 
face, as if in combat. They may also bo blazoned as Counter 
Rampant. They were thus charged upon the shield of Ri- 
chard I., before he assumed upon it the three Lions Passant. 
Two Lions Combattant are now bfcrne by the Viscount 
Lorton. In Foreign Heraldry if two Coats of Arms are im- 
paled, each of which bears a Lion Rampant, the two Lions are 
placed Counter Rampant, facing each other on the impaled 
shield ; See No. 344, PL XXIL, and No. 722. PL LIL 



Digitized by Google 



MISCELLANEOUS CHARGES. 



59 



9. A Lion Statant has his four feet upon the ground, and 
looks before him. A Lion Statant, having his Tail extended 
in a right line, is the Crest of the Duke of Northumberland ; 
No. 185, p. 55. 

10. A Lion Statant Guardant, stands looking affronte. Such 
a Lion, having his tail extended in a right line, is the Crest of 
the Duke of Norfolk : No. 180, p. 55. 

11. When sitting down, his four legs being stretched out 
on the ground, but his head erect, a Lion is Sejant; No. 187. 

12. A Lion Sejant, having his foro legs elevated, is Sejant 
Bampant ; No. 187 A, PI. X. 

13. When in the attitude of taking repose, the Lion is 
Couchant, or Dormant ; No. 187 B. 

14. A Lion Coward, is passant with a downcast look, and 
his tail between his legs; No. 187 c, drawn from a Seal of 
Arthur Tudor, as Prince of Wales. 



No. 187 c. — Lion Cowurd. 

A Demi Lion Bampant, No. 188, PI. X., and No. 131 a, PI. XIV., 
is the upper half of the body of the animal, and half its tail 
with the tuft in which it terminates. 

Lions occur so constantly in Bolls of Arms and in other 
early authorities, that I do not consider it necessary continually 
to refer to examples. 

A Lion* 8 Face, No. 189, PI. X., is a Charge : and his Head 
also is a Charge that frequently occurs ; it may be either couped, 
No., 190, or erased, No. 191. See Chap. XXX. 

The entire leg, No 192, PI. X., is a lAoris Jambe, or Gambe, 
when borne alone ; but' if the limb be cut off, whether erased or 
couped, at or below the middle joint, it is a Paw. 



Digitized by Google 



00 



MISCELLANEOUS CHAKUKS. 



Two Lions Rampant, placed back to back, are addorsed ; No. 
103. If they are passant, the one to the Dexter, and the other 
to the Sinister, they are Counter-passant. 

The Lion is frequently crowned, No. 194, PI. X., and Nos. 
41G, 417, PL XXXVIII., &amp;c. ; or he grasps some object in either 
his mouth or his paw, No. 195, PL X.; or ho is collared, and 
perhaps a chain may be attached to his collar, No. 19G; or ho 
may have his neck gorged (encircled, that is,) with a coronet ; 
or his body may bo charged with various devices ; or ho may 
be Vigilant, or Vorant — watching for his prey, or devouring it ; 
or ho may have Wings, as in the instance of the Supporters 
of the Baroness Bra ye ; or ho may bo double tailed, No. 197, 
PL X. (queue fourche'e), as ho was borno by the De Montforts, 
No. 399, PL XL1X. 

A Lion is said to be armed of his claws and tooth, and langued 
of his tonguo. 

When an Ordinary is set over a Lion, the animal is debruised 
by such Ordinary. 

When a Lion is represented as proceeding or rising up out 
of a Chief, or Fesso, or any other Charge, ho is said to be 
issuant, or naissant — as in the Arras of the De Genevilles, No. 
131 a, PL XIV. A Lion Naissant is now borno upon a chief 
by the Baron Dormer. 

Several Lions, whether Passant, or Rampant, may be charged 
upon a single shield; thus, England boars, gu., three Lions pass, 
guard., in pale, or, No. 198 ; and the Earl of Pembroke bears— per 
pale az. and gu., tiiree Lions Rampant, two and one, org., No. 199, 
PL X. 

When more than four Lions occur in the same composition, 
they are termed Lioncels. In this case, the animals are almost 
invariably lvampaut. When charged upon an Ordinary, even 
two or three Lions would be entitled Lioncels— as in the chevron 
of the COBHAMS; No. 377, PL XXV. The Shield, No. 200, of 
William Lonuespee, Earl of Salisbury, who died a.d. 1220, 



Digitized by Google 



MISCELLANEOUS CHARGES. 



61 



boars six Lioncols upon a Field azure. Another fine early 
example is the Shield of the De Bohuns, Earls of Hereford, 



which is thus blazoned : Azure, a Bend org., eotited and between 
six Lioncels or: Nos. 201, 397, and PI. XX. Amongst the 
other celebrated names with which the Lion is associated as 
an heraldic charge, aro Percy, De Laci, Fitz Alan, Mowbray, 
De Bruce, Segrave, &amp;c, &amp;c. See Chap. XXXI. 

The Lion is borne of every variety of Tincture. lie is 
always armed and langucd, gules; unless he himself or the 
field bo of that colour, in which case both his claws and his 
tongue are azure. 

I have considered the Drawing of the Lion in Chap. XXX. 

III. Various other Animals take those parts which Heralds 
havo been pleased to assign to them ; their especial vocation, 
however, appears to be to act as Supporters. As Charges, the 
Horse, the Elephant, the Camel, the Dog, the Stag, the Ante- 
lope, the Tiger, the Leopard, the Boar, the Bull, the Calf, the 




No. 198.— England. 
Tho Crown and Shield of tho time of Henry IIL 



Digitized by Google 



62 



MISCELLANEOUS CHARGE* 



Goat, the Ram, the Lamb, the Boar (Sanglicr), the Fox, the 
Wolf, the Cat-a-mountain or Wild Cat, the Ermine, the Hedge- 
hog, the Beaver, the Otter, the Squirrel, and many others 
will attract the attention of the student. The Heads of many 
Animals also appear in Blazonry. The example of an Ermine, 
No. 199 a, is drawn from the Garter-Plate of Lord Dynham, 
K.G., at Windsor, who died a.d. 1501. The animal stands 




No. 199 a. — The Ermiuo Crest of Lord Dynuam, K.G. 

upon a cap of Estate, between two spikes, and thus forms a 
Crest. In every instance, the terms that give a precise and de- 
finite individuality to each animal may easily be acquired. 

The terms that are applied to Lions are also applicable to all 
beasts of prey. Any animal in a sitting posture is Sejant, and 
Statant when standing ; and, in like manner, other terms, which 
have no special reference to habits of violence and ferocity, are 
alike applicable to every animal. 

Stags and their kindred animals have several terms peculiarly 
their own. Their antlers are Attires, the branches being Tyne* ; 
when they stand, they are at gaze, No. 202, PI. XI. ; when in 
easy motion, they are tripping. No. 203 ; when in rapid motion, 
they are at speed, No. 203 a ; and when at rest, they are lodged, 
No. 204, PL XL 

All the fiercer animals are armed of their horns ; but a stag 
is attired of his antlers. 



Digitized by Google 



Digitized by Google 



MISCELLANEOUS CHARGES 

ANIMATE BEINGS. 




Digitized by Google 



MISCELLANEOUS CHARGES. 



The Attires of Stags are borne as separate Charges. The 
Head of a stag, when placed affronte, is cabossed, No. 205, PI. XI. ; 
tin's is the well known charge of tho families of Stanley and 
Cavendish, the former bearing, on a bend az., three stays' heads 
cabossed, arg. ; the latter a similar number of the samo device, 
arg., upon a sable field; Nos. 205 a, 205 b, PI. XIV. 

A stag, full-grown and of mature age, is generally styled a 
Hart ; the female, without Horns, is a Hind. A Reindeer, in 
Heraldry, is represented as a stag with double attires. The 
Bear and Bagged Staff, No. 206, PI. XXX., form the famous 
Badge of tho Earls of Warwick; and the Talbot Dog, No. 207, 
PI. XI., is the Badge of the Earls of Shrewsbury Another 
heraldic Dog, a mastiff with short ears, is distinguished as an 
Alant. Greyhounds, again, have found favour with Heralds. 
The Marquis Camden bears on his shield three Elephants' 
heads. The Baron Blayney bears three Horse's heads. The 
supporters of the Earl of Orkney are an Antelope and a Stag ; 
those of the Baron Macdonald are two Leopards ; and those of 
the Duke of Bedford are a Lion and an Antelope, the Kussell 
crest being a Goat. Tho Earl of Malmesbury bears threo Hodge- 
hogs ; and two Foxes are leaping, saltire-wise, on the ancient 
shield of Sir Watkin Williams Wynne. The Peerage will also 
give many examples of various other animals acting as heraldic 
Supporters. See Armes Parlantes and Bebus in Chap. XIII. 

A singular Charge, that must be placed with this group, 
was borne by the De Cantelupes, and it also constitutes the 
Arms of the See of Hereford: this is a Leopard's face, 
affr&amp;nte, resting upon a Fleur-de-Lys, and having the lower 
part of the flower issuing from tho animal's mouth. In tho 
Hereford shield, the Leopard's faces are reversed. This is 
emblazoned as jessant-de-lys ; Nos. 208, 208 a, PI. XI., and 436 c, 
PL XXXIX. 

IV. Birds, Fishes, Insects, and Reptiles, also, form 



Digitized by Google 



04 



MISCELLANEOUS CHARGES. 



Charges of IIeraldry. They appear in Blazon under their 
habitual natural guise : but there are descriptive terms used 
by Heralds, which these creatures may claim as exclusively 
their own. 

Birds in the act of flight are volant, when flying aloft they 
aro soaring, and their expanded wings are said to bo overt ; 
No. 209. In the instanco of Birds of Prey, the expanded wings 
are also said to be displayed, while those of all birds that are 
not Birds of Prey, are disclosed. If the tips of the wings droop 
downwards, they are inverted, or in Lure; No. 210, PI. XI.: 
but, if elevated without being expanded, the wings aro erect ; 
No. 211: and if turned backwards, addorscd ; Nos. 212, 213. 
A Bird, about to take wing, is ruwn^ or roussant ; but trussed 
or closed, No. 215, when at rest. A Bird preying on another, 
No. 212, is trussing it, and not vorant, as a Beast of Prey. Tho 
Example, No. 212, is drawn from the Brass of Sir Peter 
Courtenay, K.G., (a.d. 1409) in Exeter Cathedral. 

A Hawk is beUed and jessed. 

A Game-cock is armed of his Beak and Spurs, crested of his 
Comb, and jowlopped of his Wattles, or simply wattled. 

A Peacock, or Paicne, having its tail displayed, is in its 
pride, as it is borne by tho Duke of Rutland for his crest. 

An Eagle, or Eme, with expanded wings, No. 212 a, is dis- 
played; as borne by tho Moxtmorencies and the Mont- 
hekmers, and quartered by the Montagues. An Eagle appears 
on the seal of Richard, Earl of Cornwall, supporting his 
Shield of Anns from its beak, about a.d. 1260; No. 212 c, 
PL LXII. See Chap. XXX. 

A young, or a small eagle, is an Eaglet; No. 459, PI. XLIX. 

An Imperial Eagle has two heads, and is crowned, as No. 
212 n, PI. XI., and No. 349, PI. XXIII. In the Roll of 
Edward II., Sir Walter Baud bears, gu., three eagles wings or. 

The two wings of an Eagle displayed, when conjoined and 
borne as a charge, are blazoned as a Vol. 



Digitized by Google 



M ISCKLL A X KOUS (HA BO KS. 



65 



A Pelican, represented as standing above its nest, having 
it* wings addorsed, and nourishing its young with its blood, 
is blazoned as a Pelican in its Piety. The example. No 218, 
PI. XI., forms the finial of the fine Brass to Dean PrestwycH, 
at Warbleton, Sussex, a.i&gt;. I486. 

A Swan, when blazoned proper, is white, with red beak, and 
has some black about the nostrils. Such a Swan, ducally 
gorged and chained, was the Badge of the Dr Bonus's, No. 
214, PL XL, and No. 234 b, PL XII. See also No. 51 1. 

Various sea-birds appear in blazon : thus, the Crest of Sir 
Richard Pole, K.G., the father of the Cardinal, is a Cormorant 
preying on a fish. 

A Ctrrnish Cliough, No. 215, the crest of the Baron Bridport, 
is black, with red legs and beak. 

Small Birds are generally drawn in the form of Blackbirds, 
but their colour must be blazoned. 

The Martlet, or Merlotlc, No. 21&lt;&gt; and 21(5 a, PI. XI., may be 
regarded as the heraldic swallow. In Cadency, the Martlet is 
the Difference of the fourth son; No. U82, PI. XIII. It was 
borne by the Db Valences, No. 101, PI. V., and PI. VII., Nos. 
419, 420; and in the Arms of Edward the Confessor, No. 78. 
PI. [., and 34&lt;&gt;, :j50, PI. XXIII. See also Nos. 305. 369, 
PI. XXV., and Nos. 412, 41,5. PI. XXVIII. The Martlet is 
generally represented without feet, as in No. 21(1 a ; but tin; feet 
are drawn correctly in many early examples. It now is charged 
upon the shield of the Earl of Arundel. 

Ravens, Parrots called by Heralds Popinjays (see No. 458, PI. 
XL.), Herons, Falcons, Cocks, Doves or Colombs, and many 
others, and the Wings of birds in various attitudes, and their 
Feathers also under various conditions, appear in Heraldry. See 
Annes Parlantes and Rebus, in Chap. XI 11. 

Fish of every variety are borne as heraldic Charges ; but 
when no particular variety is specified and the creature is of 
small size, the blazon simply states the Charge to be ' a fish." 

i 



Digitized by Google 



66 MISCLLLANEOUS CHARGES. 

When swimming in /esse, across the field, a fish is naiant ; 
No. 217, PI. XI. When in pale. No. 218, as if rising to the 
surface for breathing, it is hanriant ; but uriant when its head 
is in base. No. 218 a ; and when its body is bent, as a dolphin 
is represented, it is embowcd ; No. 219. A good example of an 




No. 210 a.— Dolphin. Brass to Nicholas Ai mulrdknk. 

heraldic Dolphin appears at the base of the Cross-brass to 
Nicholas Aumberdene, " Fishmonger of London," a.o. 1350, 
at Taplow, Bucks, No. 219 a. 

The fish borne by the Duke of Northumberland are styled 
Lucie*, a kind of pike. Amongst the other fish commonly borne 
in Heraldry are Barbels, Nos. 325, PI. XVIII., and 329 a, 
PI. XIX. ; Herrings, Roach, &amp;c. "The Heraldry of Fish" forms 
the subject of a beautiful and valuable monograph by Mr. Moule. 

Various SHELLS occur in IJeraldry, and particularly the 
Escallop, No. 220. borne by the RUSSKLLS and the Grahams : 
See Nos. .'{88, PI. XLVIII., 402, PI. XXXVII., and 409, 
PI. XXVIII. : sec also No. 513, PI. XXXIX. 

Bees and Butterflies are blazoned volant, thus, — Az., three butter- 
flies volant or. are the arms of Muscami': this shield is in the 
cloisters at ( anterbury. A Tortoise is passant. A Snake (in Roll of 
Jv in. a "BiW- *') may be gliding, or if twined into a knot it is turned. 

1 m aoinauy Bei.ncs. Heralds have introduced amongst the 
figures that act as both Supporters and ('barges, imaginary 
representations of the heavenly hierarchy. Thus Angel* form 
the Supporters of the Barons Dlcils. Noiuhwick and Ahinger, 
of Sir M. Barlow, Bart., and others. 



Digitized by Google 



Digitized by Google 



MI S CEL1/AX EOU S C HARGES. 

A XI MATE BEINGS &amp; NAT U RAT/ OBJECTS. 




Digitized by Google 



MISCELLANEOUS CHARGES. 



67 



Several animal forms have been added by Heralds, from their 
own creative imaginations, to those which Nature has provided 
for them to introduce into their symbolical blazonry. A few 
only of these occur in English Heraldry. 

The AUerion,— an eagle destitute of both beak and feet. The 
same term is also sometimes applied to heraldic natural eagles. 

The Cockatrice, No. 221, PI. XII., a winged monster, having 
the head, body, and feet of a cock, and the tail of a dragon ; 
borne for Supporters and Crest by the Earl of Donoughmore. 
The head of a Cockatrice is borne as a Crest, and is represented 
in the Brasses to Sir N. Dag worth, a.d. 1401, at Blickling, 
Norfolk, No. 222, and to Roger Elmebrygge, a.d. 1435, at 
Bedington, Surrey, No. 222 a. It was also the crest of the 
Earls of Arundel. 

The Centaur y or Sagittarius, which was the Device, and has 
been mistaken for the Arms, of King Stephen. 

The Dragon, No. 223, a winged animal, generally with four 
legs and having a tail like that of a serpent. It appears as a 
military ensign in the Bayeux Tapestry, No. 223 a, and is 
common in more recent Heraldry. 

Tho Griffin, or Gryphon, No. 224, PI. XII., combining the 
bodily attributes of the lion and the eagle, is of the same family 
with a group of the sculptured figures of Assyria. When in its 
customary attitude, erect and with wings expanded, this monster 
is segreant. A gryphon is the dexter Supporter of the Duke of 
Cleveland, and the sinister Supporter of the Duke of Man- 
chester; the Baron Dynevor has, for his dexter Supporter, a 
gryphon coward — that is, having his tail hanging down. The 
gryphon borne by the Marquis of Ormonde is wingless : this 
creature, distinguished in blazon as a Male Gryphon, has two 
horns. 

The Harpy: — Two of these monsters appear supporting his 
shield (quarterly org. and m.) on a seal of Thomas Hoo, a.d. 
1481. 

f 2 



Digitized by Google 



(58 



MISCELLANEOUS CHARGES. 



A Mermaid, No. 225, Fl. XII., a Badge of the Bkrkklkys, was 
the dexter Supporter of Sir Walter Scott ; and both the sup- 
porters of the Viscount Boynk are also Mermaids. Lord Berke- 
ley, in his fine Brass at Wotton-under-Edge, a.d. 1392, wears a 
Collar of Mermaids, No. 225 a, over his camail. In St. Alban's 
Abbey there is an early tile charged with a Mermaid. The 
shields of the Baron Lyttleton and Sir G. G. Otway, Bart., are 
supported on each side by a Triton, or Merman, No. 226, Fl. XII. 



No. 225 a.— Collar of Mermaids. 

Brass to Thomas, Lord Berkeley, aj&gt;. 1392, Wotton-nnder-Edgp, 

Gloucestershire. 

The Wyvern, No. 227, may bo described as a flying monster 
of the Dragon order, having only two logs and feet ; its Tail is 
said to be nowed. Two Wyverns support the shield of the Earl 
of Eg LINTON. 

The Unicorn is the well-known dexter Supporter of England. 
See Chap. XIX., Section 3. A pair of Unicorns also support 
the shield of the Duke of Rutland ; No. 227 a, PL XII. 

A Monster, a compound of a Lion and Fish, or a Sea-Lion, is 
known in the fabulous menagerie of ITeraldry. Two of these 
Sea-Lions are Supporters of the Viscount Falmouth. So also are 
the Pegasus, No. 227 b, the winged Horse of Classic antiquity, 
the dexter Supporter of the Baron Berwick ; the Phoenix, No. 
227 c, Fl. XII., another relic of remote tradition, that sits 
amidst flames, doing duty for a crest above the shield of Sir 
W. B. Johnston ; the Salamander, another inhabitant of flames, 
the Crest of the Earl of Selkirk ; the heraldic Ibex, or Antelope, 
the sinister Supporter of Baron Duns any ; and certain heraldie 




Digitized by Google 



MISCELLANEOUS CHARGES, 



69 



Panthers and Tigers, and other fierce animals, which breathe 
fire, and have various strange modifications of what nature has 
assigned to their prototypes. I must add to the imaginary 
groups the little Martlet, when that favourite heraldic bird is 
blazonod without feet, as in No. 216a, PL XI. 

A golden Salamander is the Crest of James, Earl Douglas, K.G., 
the first Scottish noble who was elected into the Order of the 
Garter, and who died, a.d. 1483 ; this animal is represented on 
tho Garter-Plate of the Earl as breathing flames ; No. 227 d. 




No. 227 d.— A Salamander. 
Crest of James, Earl Douglas, K.G.. a.d. 1483, from his Garter-Plate. 



Digitized by Google 



No. 239A.-CHE8TEII. 



No. 234. — BLACK PRINCE. No. 239. — LEVESoN . 



CHAPTER XI. 

MISCELLANEOUS CHARGES. 

PART III.-NATURAL OBJECTS. 

Natural objects of every kind have placed themselves without 
reserve under the orders of the Ilerald, that they may con- 
tribute to the Charges which ho places upon shields, and in any 
other capacity may realize his wishes. 

The Sun, the Moon, and the Stars, appear in Heraldry. Trees, 
Plants, and Flowers, in like manner, are constantly to be found 
in the capacity of heraldic Charges and Devices. A few descrip- 
tive terms are peculiarly appropriate to objects of this class. 
Thus : trees, &lt;fec., if grown to maturity, are accrued ; if bearing 
fruit or seeds, fructed ; if clothed with leaves, in foliage ; if 
drooping, pendent; if having their roots exposed, eradicated; 
slipped, when irregularly broken or torn off; when cut off, 
couped; when deprived of their leaves, blasted; and proper, 
when of their natural aspect and hue. The term barbed de- 
notes the small green leaves, the points of which appear about 
an heraldic rose : and seeded indicates any seed-vessel, or seeds. 



Digitized by Google 



MISCELLANEOUS CHARGES. 



71 



CELESTIAL OBJECTS. 

Tho Son in Heraldry is generally represented with a human 
face upon its disc and environed with rays, these rays being 
sometimes alternately straight and wavy. The great celestial 
luminary is blazoned as " in his splendour," or " in his glory." 
He appears thus in the shield of the Marquess of Lothian ; 
and in a Roll of arms of about 1250, (British Museum, Harl. 
MSS. 6589) Jean de la Hay bears, — Arg., the Sun in his splen- 
dour gu. ; No. 228, Plate XII. In some instances, always to be 
specified, the sun appears as shining from behind a cloud ; or, 
as rising or setting ; or, a ray of the sun is borne alone, as by 
Rauf de la Hay, in the Roll of Henry 111., No. 229, PI. XII. 

The Moon is in her Complement, or in Plenitude, when at the 
full ; she is a Crescent, when her horns point towards tho chief. 
No. 230; in Cadency, No. 380, Plate XIII., is the Difference 
of the second son. She is Decrescent, No. 231, PI. XII., when her 
horns point to the sinister. She is Increscent, or in Increment, 
when her horns point to the dexter, No. 232, PI. XII., and No. 
428, Plato XXVIII. In the Roll of Henry III., F. i»e Poun 
bears, — gu., within an orle of martlets, a crescent arg., or erm. ; 
No. 413, PI. XL VIII. Wm. uk Ryther's shield, represented 
upon the arm of his sculptured effigy (temp. Enw. I.), is charged 
with three crescents ; No. 427 a, PI. XXXVIII. : see also No. 427 b. 

Star : — see Mullet and Est oil e, in Chap. IX. 

TREES, PLANTS, FRUITS AND FLOWERS. 

The Charges of this class which are generally in use, are the 
following : — 

Cinque/oil, or Quintefoil : — a leaf or flower, having five cusps. 
No. 233, PI. XII. : see also PI. XXVI 1. In the early Rolls the 
cinque/oil and the six-foil are used without any distinction. 

Ears of Barley, Wheat, dc. : —represented in their natural 
forms. At St. Alban's Abbey, the shield of Abbot John dk 



Digitized by Google 



72 



M I8CK1.I.A N KOUS CH A KG ES. 



Wheathampstede, of tho time of Henry VI., displays gules, a 
chevron, between three clusters of as many ears of wheat, or : 
No. 201 a, Plate XV.: al*o No. 717. 

Feathers .-—the Ostrich feather is tho one that is usually borne 
as an heraldic device. It sometimes is charged upon shields; 
and it constantly appears as a favourite Badge of the Plan- 
tag en kts. The shields that are placed about tho monument 
of the Black Prince are alternately charged with his arms, and 
with three ostrich feathers upon a sable field; No. 234, p. 70. 
Kach of these feathers has its quill piercing a small scroll, bear- 
ing the words — Ich dien ; No. 234 a, Plate XII. The ostrich 
feather was habitually used by the Black Prince, as a Badge. 
It appears, with the scroll, upon the seal of Hknry IV., before 
he becamo sovereign. His sou, Hexry V., bore a similar badge, 
the feather being carried by a swan (a badge of his mother, Mary 
i&gt;e Bonux) in its beak; No. 234 b, PI. XII. The ostrich feather 
and scroll have a place also amongst the heraldic insignia of 
Prince Arthur Tudor, a.t&gt;. 1502, at Worcester; No. 235. The 
feathers of other birds besides the ostrich sometimes appear in 
early blazonry. Thus, the Crest of Sir Hugh Courtenay, K.G., 
(about A.D. 1305) is formed of a plumage of swans feathers, in 
three rows, (Garter- Plate). The Crest of Sir Thomas Loveix, 
K.G., (temp. Hknry VII.) is composed of a bundle of peaeocVs 
feathers ppr., in the form of a garb, banded gu. ; (Garter-Plate). 
Again, the panache-crest of Lord Ferrers of Chartley, consists 
of peamck's feathers, (Brass, Merevale Abbey, A.D, 1412), No. 
2(57 a, Plate XXVI.; and a panache of turhexfs feathers is the 
Crest of Sir John Harsyck, (Brass, Southacre, Norfolk), No. 301, 
Plate I. See Chap. XVII., Sect, I. 

Fleur-de-Lys : — this most beautiful and effective Charge, gene- 
rally supposed to be the flower of the Lily, is the ancient 
cognizance of France. In its origin, the Fleur-de-Lys or Flour- 
de-Luce, may be a Kcbus, signifying the •« Flower of Louis." 
Mr" Plaxche, (who always speaks with authority when he dons 



Digitized by Google 



Digitized by Google 



MI S CELL'AXE 01* S CHARGES 
XATTJRAIf OBJECTS - DESCRIPTIVE TERMS -MODERN CADENC Y. 

CHAPTERS xn XIII. xr. r fcXVI 




6* BON - — 7^ SON 8*SOV SON 




Plate XT 



Digitized by Google 



MISCELLANEOUS CHARGES 



73 



his tabard), after stating this supposition, adds that " Clovis is 
the Frankish form of the modern Louis, the C being dropped, 
as in Clothaire, Lothairc, &amp;c." If CWVIS himself bore the Fleur- 
de-Lys, that famous heraldic Charge may have been assumed by 
the Frankish Prince as his liebus, from the favourite Clove junk, 
or gillyflower. The Fleur-de-Lys appears in early Heraldry 
under several modifications of its typical form. It was in 
especial favour with tho designers of the inlaid pavement-tiles 
of the Middle Ages; Nos. 236, 230 a, 230 b, Plate XIII. It 
forms one of the figures of the diaj&gt;er of the shield of ROBERT 
de Verb, No. 156, Plate VI.; and it decorates the Royal 
'Pressure of Scotland, in the shield placed by Henry III., or 
Edward I., in Westminster Abbey; No. 105, Plate V. This 
same figure was known to the Romans ; and it formed the orna- 
mental heads of sceptres and pommels of swords from the earliest 
period of the French monarchy, No. 238, PI. XIII. ; Nos. 237, 
237 a, PL XV. ; the former from St George's Chapel, Windsor, 
and the latter from the monument of Edward III. at West- 
minster, are beautiful examples of Fleurs-de-Lys. 

The Fleur-de-Lys was first borne on aKoyal Seal by Louis VII. 
of France, a.d. 1137—1180. The Counter-Seal of the Dauphin 
Louis, (afterwards Louis VIJI.), attached by him to a deed 
dated Nov. 21, 1216, during the time that he was in England 
supporting the Barons in their resistance to King John, is a 
mobt interesting early example of a French Royal Shield, stmie'e 
de-lys, No. 238 a, Chap. &amp;XIV. Edward III. quartered the 
French shield, seme'e de-lys, on his Great Seal and in his Arms, 
a.d. 1340, No. 536 B, Plate LVIII., and No. 286, &amp;c. ; and in or 
about 1405, Henry IV. reduced the number of the Fleur-de-Lys 
to three, that reduction having been effected in the French Seal 
by Charles V., a.d. 1364—1380, No. 536 d, Plate LVIII. The 
Fleurs-de-Lys were removed from the English Shield in 1801. 
In modern Cadency the Fleur-de-Lys is the mark of the sixth 
son ; No. 384, Plate XIII. 



Digitized by Google 



74 



M 1SCKLL A N E0US CHARGES. 



This charge is blazoned in the Koll of Henry III. One of 
the early shields in Westminster Abbey is semee de-lys ; No. 2, 
p. 12. The Fleur-de-Lys is now borne, without any other 
charge, in the shield of the Baron Dioby. See Plates XXVIII., 
XXXII., and XXXIX. 

Qarbe : — a wheatsheaf, borne in the arms of the Earls of 
Chester, and still apparent in the greater number of the 
shields of the nobility and gentry of the County Palatine of 
Cheshire; No. 239 b, Plate XII., and 239 a, p. 70: see also 
No. 466, Plate LI. The Arms of the Prince of Wales, as 
Earl of Chester, are, az., three garbes or, as No. 239 a. : see 
Chap. XIX., Sect. VII. A Garbe is borne in the arms of the 
town of Sheffield, (Sheaf-Said). Garbes, or sheaves, of barley, 
&lt;fcc, are also borne as Charges. 

Gillyflower : — a species of pink, in great favour in the middle ages. 

Hill and Hillock : — A green mound. When only one appears, 
the former term is used ; but the latter denotes several mounds, 
their exact number to be specified. 

Hurst :— a group of trees. Thus, Elm hurst bears seven elm- 
trees on a mound. 

Leaves : — the leaf or leaves, or the branches of any tree or 
plant must be specified and described in the blazon. Hazel- 
leaves are borne by Hazelrigg ; Oak-branches by Okstead, No. 
239 a, Plate XII., and Oakes; Strawberry-leaves (or Fraises) by 
Frazer ; LaurelAeaves, by Leveson, No. 239, p. 70, three laurel 
leaves, two and one, or, quartered by the Duke of Sutherland ; 
Holly-leaves, by Blackwood, &amp;c. 

Planta-Qenista:— the Broom-plant, the famous Badge of the 
Plantagenet family. The pods, with their seeds, as well as 
the leaves and flowers, are represented upon the bronze effigy of 
Richard II. in Westminster Abbey; No. 240, PI. XII. The field 
of the seal of Jaspar Tudor, is semee of the Planta-Qenista, and 
is another good example of its treatment in heraldic composition. 
44 Archadogia" xviii., p. 429 : see also Chap. XIX., Sect TV. 



Digitized by Google 



MISCELLANEOUS CHARGES. 



75 



Pods of Beam, dc. : — when used as Charges, the pods are open, 
and show their seed. There is a good example in the Brass to 
Walter Pescod, merchant, a.d. 1398, at Boston, in Lincolnshire. 

Rose :— in Heraldry, the Rose is represented after the con- 
ventional manner exemplified in No. 385, PI. XIII. In some 
few early examples the small inner leaves are omitted, as 
in No. 242, Chap. XIX. When tinctured gules, the Hose is the 
Badge of the Plantagenets of the House of Lancaster, the 
Yorkist Rose being argent. A pleasing example of the heraldic- 
Rose with foliage associated with the flower, occurs, carved 
upon an oak bench-end, in the Chancel of Pulham, in Norfolk ; 
No. 241 a. In some early shields several Roses are blazoned, 
as in No. 3.93, Plate XXXVII., by a Berkeley ; and in No. 431, 
Plate XXXVIII., by a De Tressel: see also Nos. 388 k and 
388 l, in PI. LXXI. Chaplets of Roses also sometimes appear 
in blazon. In Cadency, the Rose is the Difference of the seventh 
son ; No. 385. Occasionally, the Queen of Flowers is in use in 
Heraldry in its natural form and aspect, with stalk, leaves, and 
buds. Such a Rose is the Emblem of England. See Chap. XVII., 
Sect L ; and Chap. XIX., Sect. IV. 

Rosc-en-Soleil .-—the white Rose of the Plantagenets of the 
House of York, surrounded by rays, as of the sun. It was 
assumed by Edward IV., after the Battle of Mortimer's Cross, 
Feb. 2nd, 1461 ; No. 243, and No. 248 a, Plato XIII. The 
Monument of Prince Arthur Tudor, a.d. 1502, at Worcester, 
abounds in fine examples of the heraldic roses of the House of 
York and Lancaster, and also of the Tudors ; as in Nos. 242, 243, 
and 247, Chap. XIX. 

SJiamrock: — a trefoil, or three-leaved grass, the Emblem of 
Ireland. It is represented now as growing on the same stalk as 
the Rose and the Thistle. 

Six-foil :— a flower having six leaves or cusps. It is an early 
Charge. By the French Heralds, at an early period, six-foils 
were blazoned as Angennes ; No. 244, Plate XIII. 



Digitized by Google 



MISCELLANEOUS CHARGES. 



Stock .—the stump of a Tree ; No. 245, PI. XIII. The Kebus 
of Woodstock. 

Teazle : — tho head or seed-vessel of a species of thistle used in 
cloth manufactures. 

Thistle .-—the Emblem of Scotland It is now represented as 
growing on the same stalk as the lfose and the Shamrock. 

Trefoil : — a flower or leaf, having three cusps. It is generally 
blazoned with a stalk — a trefoil slipped ; No. 246, PI. XIII. 

Tudor-Rose: — a combination of the Lancastrian and Yorkist 
Hoses. Sometimes it quarters the two Tinctures, as in No. 241, 
PI. XIII. ; and sometimes it has the rose argent charged upon 
the rose gules. Splendid examples of Heraldic Koses occur in 
King's College Chapel, Cambridge, and in Henry VII.'s Chapel, 
Westminster. At King's, the Kose, Fleur-de-Lys, and Port- 
cullis are sculptured with extraordinary boldness, each figure 
being surmounted by a crown, as in No. 248, PI. XIII. 

Various Fruits, Seeds, and Berries are borne as Charges, and 
they are tinctured as well as drawn proper, unless tho contrary 
be specified. Thus, Peaches were borne by Sir John Pechie : the 
arms of George Abbot, Archbishop of Canterbury, a.d. 1G1 1-1633, 
are, — gu., a chevron bettceen three pears or (at Canterbury and 
Guildford) ; the three pears are still borne by the Baron Col- 
chester ; three acorns appear in the arms of Sir W. W. Dallinq ; 
three fir-cones in the arms of Sir E. G. Perrott, &amp;c. 




No. 241 a. — Heraldic Roec, Pulham Church, Norfolk 



Digitized by Google 



I3Y R.ON\ 




No. 250. No. 249. No. 2. r &gt;l. 



CHAPTER XII. 

INSCRIPTIVE T F. R M 8. 

Thk Descriptive Heraldic Terms that are arranged in alphabetical 
order in this Chapter are of goneral application. 

Abatement : — any sign of degradation. 
Accosted : — placed side by side. 
Accrued : — grown to maturity. 

Addorsed : — placed back to back ; or, pointing or inclining 
backwards. 

Affrontee : — so placed as to show the full face, or the front of 
any figure or object. 

Appaume'e : — the hand opened and set upright, and presenting 
the palm to view. 

Armed : — provided, as a beast or bird of prey is, with the natural 
weapons for defence and offence. 

Armoyve : — charged with a shield of arms. 

Arrondie : — rounded, curved. 

Attired : — having Antlers, or such Horns as are natural to all 
animals of the Deer species. 



Digitized by Google 



78 



DBSCBIPTIVK TKHMS. 



Augmented : — having Augmentations, or honourable additions 
to Arms. 

a 

Banded : — encircled with a band or riband. 

Barbed : — having small green leaves, as the heraldic Kose. 

Barded : — caparisoned, as a Charger. The Bardings of the 
knightly war-horses were commonly charged with heraldic 
insignia. 

Barruly, Barrulee, Burle'e : — barry of ten or more pieces. 

Barry : — divided Bar-wise into an even number of parts. 

Barry-Bendy : — divided into an even number of parts, both 
horizontally and diagonally. 

Bar-wise : — disposed after the manner of a Bar. 

Battled, or Embattled .-—having Battlements, or bordered after 
the manner of Battlements. 

Battled-Embattled : — having double Battlements, or one Battle- 
ment set upon another. 

Beaked .—applied to Birds not of prey, to denote the Tincture 
of their Beaks. 

Belled : — having a Bell or Bells attached. 

Bend-wise : — disposed after the manner of a Bend. 

Bendy : — divided Bend-wise into an even number of parts. 

Bezantee : — studded with Bezants. 

Billetee .—studded with Billets. 

Blasted : — deprived of leaves, or withered. 

Bordered : — having a border of the samo tincture as the field. 
This is an arrangement of common occurrence in continental 
Heraldry; but it is almost, if not altogether, unknown in the 
Heraldry of England. (See Bordure, p. 83.) 

Braced, or Brazed : — interlaced. 

BreUcpce : —counter-embattled, having Battlements facing both 
ways. 

Cdboned : — when the Head of an animal is borne affrontee. 
without any part of the neck being seen. 
Cadency :— see Chapters XV. and XVI. 



Digitized by Google 



DJOCRlPnVK TERMS. 



79 



Cantoned : — placed between four objects or Charges : or when 
a single Charge is placed in the first quarter of a shield. 

Cercelee, or Becercelee .-—curling at the extremities. 

Charged : — placed or borne upon the field of a Shield, Banner, 
Ordinary, or any other object. 

Chausse : — wearing shoes. 

Cheeky, or Cfiequee : — a Field covered witli small squares 
alternating of two Tinctures, there being more than two hori- 
zontal rows of such squares; No. 120, PI. IV. The shield of 
the Dk Warrexks, still quartered by the Duke of Norfolk, is 
chequee or and az. ; Nos. 127 n, 127 c, PI. VI. 

Clenched : — closed, as the Hand may be. 

Close : — when the Wings of a Bird lie close to its Body. 

Clowe : — studded or fastened with nails. 

Combatant : — as if in the act of fighting. 

Compony, Comjxmee, or Gobony :— a series of small squares of two 
alternating Tinctures, arranged in a single row; No. 124, PI. IV. 
Compounding Anm ."—SCO Chap. XIV. 
Conjoined : — united and joined together. 

Conjoined in Lure : — two wings joined together with their 
tips downwards, as borne by the Seymours. 

Contournee : — sitting, standing, or moving, with the Face to 
the Sinister. 

Cotised : — placed between two Cotises. 

Couchant : — lying down. 

Couchee: — when a shield is suspended diagonally from the 
sinister chief angle ; as in No. 626, PL LXVI. 
Counter : — reversed. 

Counter-Changed: — having a reciprocal interchange of Tinc- 
tures: see Chap. VIII. 

Count(T-Comp&lt;me'e :— having a Double Componee. 

Cofinter-Einbattled .-—having reversed Battlement*. 

Counter-Embowed . —bent with the Elbow to the Sinister ; or 
bent in reversed directions. 



Digitized by Google 



80 I&gt;KSnRIl»riVK TKRM&amp; 

Counter- Fl eurie : — when a pair or several pairs of B'leurs-de-lys 
are set opposite to each other. 

Counter- Passant : — walking in opposite directions. 

Counter-Salient .-—leaping in opposite directions. 

Counter- Vair : — a variety of Fair, in which the bells are 
arranged base to base ; No. ,*&gt;0, p. 20. 

Couped : — cut off smoothly as by a sharp instrument, and 
bounded by a right line. It is the converse to Erased. 

Courant : — running. 

Covert : — partly covered. 

Coward, or Cowed : — when an animal has its tail between its 
legs, and in various ways indicates tenor. 

Crampeitte : — ornamented, as the scabbard of a sword is at its 
extremity. 

Crenellee : — embattled ; the open spaces are the Crenelles, or 
Embrasures, and the masses which rise alternately between them 
are Merlons. 

Crested : — having a Crest, as a bird has a crest of feathers. 
Crined : — having hair or a mane. 

Crusily, or Crusilee : — semee of Crosses-Crosslets. If any other 
form of Gross is introduced, its distinctive character must be 
specified. 

Dancettee : — deeply indented. 

Debruised: — when an Ordinary reste upon an Animal, or 
another Ordinary. 
Decked : — adorned. 

Degreed, or Degraded : — placed upon Steps. 

Demembred, or Dismembered: — cut into several pieces, but 
without having the severed fragments disarranged. 

Demi : — the Half. The upper or front Half is always under- 
stood, unless the contrary be stated. 

Developed .—fully displayed, as a Flag. 

Diapered .—see Chap. VIII., and Plates VI., VII. 



Digitized by Google 



DFSCRIPTIVE TERMS. 81 

Dimidiated .-— cut in halves, and one half removed. See Chap. 
XIV. 

Disclosed .-—having tho Wings expanded—applied to all BirdH 
that are wA Birds of prey. 

Displayed : — having the wings expanded — applied to all Birds 
of prey. 

Disponed .-—arranged. 

Dormant .-—in tho attitude and act of sleeping. 
Double-tele : — having two Heads. 

Double-queue, or Queue-fourchee : — having tivo Tails, as in the 
case of some lions. 

Dovetail : — a system of Counter-wedging. 
Embattled .-—battled. 

Embowed : — bent, with the Elbow to the Dexter : arched. 
Embrued : — stained with Blood. 
Enfiled : — thrust through with a Sword. 
Engotdee : — pierced through tho Mouth. 

Engrailed : — having an arched border line, the small contiguous 
arches being concave : it is the converse to Invected ; No. 17 a, p. 1 8. 

Enhanced : — raised towards the chief. Thus, the Baron Byron 
bears,— arg. y three Bendlets enhanced gu. ; No. 249, p. 76. 

Ensigned .^-adorned, bearing insignia of honour. 

Environnee, and Enveloped : — surrounded. 

Equipped : — fully caparisoned and provided. 

Eradicated : — torn up by the Boots. 

Erased: — torn off roughly, so that the severed parts have 
jagged edges. It is the converse to Couped. 

Erect : — set upright in a vertical position. 

False: — voided. Thus, an Orle is blazoned as a " false es- 
cutcheon," by the early Heralds. 

Fesse-wise .-—disposed after the manner of a Fesse. 

Figured : — when an object, as tho Sun's Disc, is charged with 
a representation of a human face. 

Fimbriated : — having a narrow border. 

u 



Digitized by Google 



82 DESCRIPTIVE TERMS. 

Finned : — having fins, as Fish. 
Firme'e : — extended to the extremities of the Shield. 
Fitchee .-—pointed at the base, and so M fixable " in the 
ground. 

Flanched : — a shield, of which the I lunches only are disclosed, 
the rest of the field being surmounted by some distinct compo- 
sition, or covered by some plain Tincture; as in No. 622, 
Chap. XXVIII. 

Fleurettee, or Florettee .-—terminating in Fleurs-de-Lys ; also 
semie of Fleurs-de-Lys. 

Fleurie : — terminating in three points ; also, temSe de lys. 
Flexed : — bent or bowed. 
Flighted : — feathered, as an Arrow. 

Fly: — the length of any Flag, from its point of suspension 
outwards ; also, the outer side or extremity of any Flag. See 
Hoist. 

Floiant .-—floating. 

Foliated .-—having Cusps, and being formed like a Leaf or 
Leaves. 

Fourchie : — divided into two parts towards the extremity. 

Fresnee : — rearing up on the hind legs. 

Frettie .-—covered with Frette-work. • 

Fructed : — bearing fruit or seeds, of whatsoever kinds. 

Fumant : — emitting smoke. 

Furnished : — equipped or provided with. 

FusilUe, FusiUy : — covered with Fusils. 

(Garnished .-—appropriately adorned. 

At Ooze .-—when an animal of the chase stands still, affrontfa 

Gerattyng : — see Chap. XV. 

Girt, or Girdled .-—bound round any object. 

Gliding .-—the movement of Snakes. 

Gobony .'—Company. 

Gorged .-—encircled round the neck or throat. 
Gouttee, or Guttle : — sprinkled over with Drops. 



Digitized by Google 



DESCRIPTIVE TERMS. 83 

This terra is used with various affixes, as follows .—Gouttee do 
larmes, " sprinkled with tears," or gouttee d'azure (tinctured azure) ; 
gouttee (Teau, ** with water " (argent) ; goutte'e d'olive, " with oil " 
(vert) ; goutte'e d'or, 44 with gold ;" goutte'e de poix, 44 with pitch " 
(sable) ; and gouttic du sang, 44 with blood" (gules) ; No. 250, at 
the head of this Chapter. 

The arms of Johs Feld, emblazoned upon his tabard and 
also on his shield (in his Brass at Standon, Herts), aro, — gu., a 
/esse or, between three eagles displayed org. guUtes du sang ; No. 25 a. 
See Tabard, Chap. XIII. 

Gouttee reversed .-—when the Drops have their natural position 
inverted ; No. 251, at the head of this Chapter. 

Gradient .-—the act of walking, as by a Tortoise. 

Grafted : — inserted and fixed in. 

Guardant .-—looking with the full face towards the spectator. 
The term is applied to Beasts of Prey. See Gaze and Affronter. 
Gyronny, Gyronnte : — divided after the manner of a Gyrnn. 
Habited : — clothed. 

Hauricnt .-—applied to a Fish, when placed in Pale, and having 
its head in chief. It is the converse of Uriant. 

House .-—placed higher than in its customary position. 

Heightened : — having a decorative accessory or another charge, 
placed higher in the field than any Charge. 

Hilted .-—having a handle, as a Sword. 

Hoist .-— The depth of any Flag from its point of suspension 
downwards : also its head or upper side. See Fly. 

Hooded: — having the Head covered with a Coif or Hood. 

Hoofed : — having Hoofs of any particular Tincture. 

Horned . —having Horns of any particular Tincture. 

Humettee : — couped, or cut short, at the extremities. 

Hurt/e :— somee of Huries. 

Imbrued, Imbued : — stained with Blood. 

Impaled .-—united by Impalement. 

Imperially Crowned .-—surmounted by the Crmon of England. 

o 2 



Digitized by Google 



84 



DESCRIPTIVE TERMS. 



Incensed : — having Fire issuing from the Mouth and Ears. 
Increment, or Increscent :— a Now Moon, having its Horns 
towards the Dexter. 

Indented : — having a serrated border line. 

Inflamed : — burning in Flames. 

In Bend .—sot Bend-wise. 

In Chevron : — set in the form of a Chevron. 

In Chief:- -set in the Chief of the Shield. 

In Cross : — set in the form of a Cross. 

In Fcssc : — set Fesse-urise. 

In Foliage :— a Plant or Tree bearing Leaves. 

In Glory : — the Sun surrounded by rays. 

In Lure : — two Wings oonjoined, with their tips in Base. 

In Pale : — set Pale- wise. 

In PUe : — set after the form of a Pile. 

In Pride : — when a Peacock or other Bird has its tail displayed. 

In Quadrangle .-—four charges, or four groups of charges, so 
arranged that one charge or one group is placed in each quarter 
of a Shield. 

In SaUire .-—set after the form of a Saltire. 

In Splendour : — the same as In Glory. 

Interlaced : — linked together. 

Invecied : — having an arched border line, the small contiguous 
arches being convex: it is the converse to Engrailed; No. 17 b, 
p. 18. 

Inverted : — reversed. 

Irradiated .-—illuminated or decorated with Rays or Beams of 
Light 

Issuant : — proceeding from or out of. 

Jessant . —shooting forth, as Plants do out of the Earth. 

Jessant-de-lys .-—when a Fleur-do-lys issues from any object. 

Jessed : — having straps, as a Hawk in Falconry. 

Jotclopped : — having Gills, as a Game-cock. 

Laminated, or Scaled : — having scales. 



Digitized by Google 



DESCRIPTIVE TERMS. 85 

Langued .-—applied to denote the Tincture of the Tongue of any 
creature. 

Legged, or Membered : — to denote the Legs of Birds. 
Lined : — having an inside Lining : also to denote having Cords 
or Chains attached. 

Lodged .-—when an Animal of the Chase is at rest. 
Lozcngy, LozengSe .-—divided into Lozenges. 
Maned : — having a Mane, as a Lion, a Horse, &lt;fec. 
ManteUe : — a shield divided, as in No. 252, PI. XIII. 
Masoned : — made to represent Masonry or Brickwork. 
Membered .-—to denote the Beak and Legs of any Bird. 
Mounted .-—applied to a Horse when carrying a Rider. 
Muraillee .-—see Walled. 
Naiant : — when a Fish swims in Fesse. 

Naissant: — the same as Issuant, but applied only to living 
Creatures. 

Nebulee /—having a peculiar wavy border line ; No. 17, d. 
Nerved .-—having Fiibres, as Leaves have. 
Nowed : — tied in a Knot. 
Oppressed : — the same as Debruised. 

Over all, or Sur le tout .-—when one Charge is borne over all 
others. 

Overt : — having the Wings expanded for flight. 

Pale-wise, or In Pale : — placed or arranged after the manner 
of a Pale ; that is, set in a vertical position, or arranged vertically 
one above another. 

Paly .-—divided Pale-wise into an even number of Tarts. 

Paly Bendy : — divided evenly both Pale-wise and Bend-wise. 

Party, or Parted : — divided after an heraldic manner. 

Pascuant : — grazing. 

Passant .-—walking. 

Passant Guardant : — walking, with the Face affrontee. A 
Lion passant guardant was distinguished by the early French 
Heralds, as a Leopard or a Lion LeoparcU. 

Passant Beguardant .—walking, and looking back. 



Digitized by Google 



8(J 



HKSCKllTi VE TERMS. 



Passant Repassant : — the same as Counter Passant ; that is, when 
one animal is passant to the dexter, and another to the sinister. 
Patouce a very beautiful form of Cross ; No. 77, PI. III. 
PelletUe .-—studded with Pellets. 
Pendent .-—drooping. 
Per :— by means of. 

Pierced .-—perforated, so as to show either the Field, or some 
diiforent Tincture through the aperture. 
Pily .-—divided Pile-wise. 

Pily Bendy : — divided both Pile-wise and Bend-wise. 
Plattee .-—studded with Plates. 

Pomelled .-—to denote the Tincture of the uppermost part of 
a sword-hilt 

Powdered, Poudrce : — seme*e of small objects. 

Preying .-—when a Beast devours its Prey : see Trussing. 

Purfled : — lined, guarded, or bordered with Fur. 

Quarterly : — divided into four Quarters ; also divided into more 
than four sections, in which case the number is to be specified in 
the Blazon, as Quarterly of six, of eight, &amp;c. 

Queue-Fourchee : — see Double-queue. 

Quilled : — to denote the Tincture of the Quills of Feathers. 
Radiant, or Rayonnce .-—encircled with Bays. 
Baguly, or Ragulee .-—serrated, as in No. 17, h. 
Rampant, and Rampant Sejant .-—see Chap. X., 44 Heraldry of 
the Lion." 

Rasee .-—erased. 

Rebated .-—broken off, cut short, or recessed. 

Reflected, or Reflexed .-—bent, curved, or carried backwards. 

Reguardant : — looking backwards. 

Removed : — out of its proper position. 

Retorted .-—intertwined frette-wisc. 

Rising, or Rnussant .-—about to take wing. 

Rompu .-—broken or interrupted. 

Salient : — leaping or bounding. 

Stdtire-wise .—divided or arranged per Saltirc. 



Digitized by Google 



DESCRIPTIVE TERMS. 



87 



Sans : — without ; as Sans nombre, to imply that a charge is re- 
peated many times, without the precise number of the repetitions 
being specified. 

SarceUee .-—cut through the middle. 

Scintillant : — sparkling, or emitting Sparks. 

Seeded : — bearing Seeds or Seed-vessels. 

Segreant .-—when a Griffin or Wyvern is erect with expanded 
wings. 

Sejant .-—sitting. 

Sejant Addorsed : — sitting back to back. 

Semee .-—strewed, or scattered over with any Charge or Object. 
See p. 11, and see also Powdered. 

Shafted :— to denote the Shaft of a Spear, Arrow, &amp;c. 

Slipped .-—when a Leaf, Twig, Branch, or Flower is torn from 
off the parent stem. 

Soaring : — flying aloft. 

Springing .-—Salient, also Issuant. 

Statant:—the ordinary attitude in which an animal "stands 
at ease." 

Stringed : — having Strings, as a Harp ; or, being suspended by a 
Cord, as a Bugle- Horn ; or, being in any way attached to a String, 
or fastened by one. 

Subverted :- reversed. 

Surmounted . —when one Charge is placed over another. 

Sur-tout, Sur le tout .'—surmounted, or over all. 

Sustained, Soutennee: — having a narrow lower border; as, a 
Chief gu. sustained or, would be a red Chief having a narrow lower 
border of gold. 

TasseUed .-—adorned with Tassels, as tho cushions below the 
heads of Monumental Effigies. 

Tiercee .-—divided into three equal parts. 
Torqued .-—wreathed. 
TournSe .-—the same as Beguardant. 
Towered .-—crowned with Towers or Turrets. 
Transfixed .—pierced through, or Transpierced. 



Digitized by Google 



S8 



Mscitirrivt: tkkms. 



Transfiucnt r — flowing through. 
Transmuted : — counterchanged. 

Transposed .-—having the original or natural position or ar- 
rangement reversed. 

Traversed : — facing to the Sinister. 

Trejlee : — semee of Trefoils, or bordered, or otherwiso adorned 
with them. 

Tricked .-— sketched in outline with pen and ink. 

Tricorporated : — having three bodies united to a single head, 
from which, as a centre, the bodies radiate at equal distances. 
A tricorporate lion appears on a seal of Edmonp, First Earl of 

L.VNCASTKR, A.D. 1250. 

Trijqring, or Trippant .'—applied to Animals of the Chase, when 
in easy motion, No. 20:*, PI. XI., and corresponding with Passant. 
When moving more rapidly, such animals are at speed. Counter- 
Tripping implies that two or more animals of the chase are 
tripping past each other in opposite directions. 

Trononee .-—cut to pieces, the pieces standing separately, but 
retaining in their arrangement the original figure or contour of 
the Charge : as in the instance of the Saltire in No. 253, 
PL XIII. 

Trunked .-—having a Stem or Trunk as a Tree. 
Trussed .-—having the wings closed. 

Trussing .-—devouring, as a Bird of Prey does : see Preying. 
Turretted : — crowned with Turrets. 
Tusked : — having Tusks. 

Umbrated, or Adumbrated : — shadowed, or under Shadow. 
UMe, or Undy .-—wavy. 
Unguled : — having Hoofs. 

Urinant: — when a Fish swims pale-wise with its Head to the 
Base, the reverse of Hauriant. 

Verdee, or Verdoy .-—charged with any Plants. 
Verted, or Reverted :— the same as Flexed and Reflexed. 
Vervclled, or Varvelled . —having small rings attached. 
Vested : — habited, clothed. 



Digitized by Google 



DESCRIPTIVK TERMS. 



89 



Vigilant : — on the watch for prey. • 

Voided .-—having tho entire central area removed. 

Volant .-—flying. 

Vorant : — devouring. 

Vtdned : — wounded, bo that the blood is dropping. 

Walled, Murattie : — covered with a representation of Masonry. 

Wattled .-—"having a Comb and Gills, as a Cock and a Cockatrice. 

Wavy .-—having an undulated border lino. 

Winged : — provided with Wings. 

Wreathed : — adorned with a Wreath, or twisted in the form of a 
Wreath or Garland. 



No. 200.— Shield of William Longkspee, Earl of 8alisdury. Died 
a.i». 1226. From his Effigy iu Salisbury Cathedral. 8oe p. 60. 




Digitized by Google 



A.l&gt;. 1407. A.I). 1594. a.d. 1031. 




No. 309.— Mitrea. 



CHAPTER XIII. 



MISCELLANEOUS NAMES AND TITLES NOT INCLUDED UNDER THE 

TERM "CHARGES." 

The important Group of Heraldic Terms that constitute the 
contents of the present Chapter, are arranged in the same 
Alphabetical Order that obtains in Chapters IX., X., XI., and 
XII. 

Abatement :— a sign of Degradation : see Chap. XXVIII., 
Sect. 2. 

Abeyance : — denotes that condition in the descent of a Peer- 
age, in which it is vested in two or more Co-heirs, both or all 
of them having precisely the same claim ; and consequently, 
since the Peerage can descend only in such a manner as to be 
held by one person, when there are several equal Claimants 
none of them can maintain any claim. This state of things 
continues, until all the original Co-heirs but one fail, and then the 
Representative of that one becomes the true Heir and inherits 
the Peerage. Thus, tho Peerage that is in Abeyance is dormant 
only, and not dead, since it revives at onco when tho Abeyance 
ceases to affect it. 



Digitized by Google 



MISCELLANEOUS NAMES AND TITLES. 



91 



Achievement of Arms : — a complete heraldic Composition, in 



which the Shield exhibits all its Quarterings, and its Impale- 
ment, together with its external accessories of Coronet, Sup- 
porters, Crests, Motto, &amp;c. Any complete heraldic Composition 
may bo entitled an Achievement of Arms. 

Archbishop : — tho highest Order in the English Church. The 
Archbishop of Canterbury is tho first subject of the realm, next to 
the Princes of tho Blood Uoyal. He is the " Most Reverend 
Father in God," is Archbishop "by Divine Providence," and is 
styled " Your Grace." The Lord High Chancellor ranks next 
to the Archbishop of Canterbury, and then follows in the order 
of precedence the Archbishop of York : he is " by Divine Permis- 
sion," his style in all other respects boing tho same as his Grace 
of Canterbury. Of the two Irish Archbisltops of Armagh and 
Dublin, the former is tho Primate : their Graces rank imme- 
diately after the Archbishop of York. The wives of Archbishops 
and Bishops have no title, and take no rank from their husbands. 
See Pall and Pastoral Staff, in Chap. IX. ; and Bishop and Mitre 
in Chap. XIII. 

Argent : — tho Motal Silver. 

Armory : — the Herald's Science and Art, which is more gene- 
rally entitled and recognized as Heraldry. Also, a List of 
Names and Titles, to which their several Arms are attached and 
blazoned. See Ordinary. 

Arms : — an heraldic composition, complete in itself, and now 
generally borne upon a shield. 

Arms of Dominion :— tho armorial insignia of a Sovereign 
Kegnant, borne by him or her in right of the regal office and 
rank, and as the symbols of supremo authority and power. Such 
arms are also, by custom, held to be the arms of the country 
and the nation, as well as of tho Sovereign. Tine Heraldry 
distinguishes these arms of Dominion from all other armorial 
ensigns, and it restricts them absolutely to tho successive 
occupants of the throne. Thus, tho Koyal Arms are not to be 




Digitized by Google 



92 



MISCELLANEOUS NAMES AND TITLES. 



borne without Difference, even by the nearest relatives of the 
Sovereign; and no person whatever can rightly quarter these 
arms without some mark of Cadency. Princesses, indeed, fre- 
quently bear their paternal arms with no other Difference than 
a lozenge instead of a shield, and their own Coronet in place of 
the Crown ; and this is a sufficient distinction while Princesses 
remain unmarried ; as it is also sufficient that they should place 
their arms in the sinister half of a 'shield, in impalement with 
the arms of their husbands when they marry. In this manner, 
the arms of the sons and daughters of Edward III. are blazoned 
upon his monument in Westminster Abbey : the shield of each 
of the Princes, his sons, has its own proper Label for Differ- 
ence ; but the Princesses, the daughters of the King, have their 
arms impaled by the arms of their husbands, with no other 
difference than their position in the sinister halves of the shields. 
In our own times, Labels charged with distinct marks of Cadency 
have been assigned to the Princesses, as well as to the Princes 
of the Royal Family : see Chap. XIX., Section 7 ; see, also, 
PI. XXXVI. 

Armes Parlantes ;— such armorial devices and compositions 
as fall under the definition of a Rebus. This is a modern dis- 
tinction ; and it does not indicate any profound appreciation of 
early Ileraldry on the part of those who introduced and adopted 
it. Allusive or Canting Arms abound in early Heraldry ; and 
if it were possible to trace every early shield to its actual 
origin, it would very probably be discovered that in some 
degree or in some circumstance all arms were Armes Parlantcs. 
See Rebus, in this same Chapter. 

Attainder: — absolute deprivation of every civil right and 
privilege, involving a transmission of the same fearful penalty, 
and a consequent forfeiture even of pure blood and descent, as 
well as of all hereditary claims. It was the weapon with which 
Treason, or what passed for Treason, used to be smitten down. 
Attainder required a Special Act of the Legislature, and it 



Digitized by Google 



MISCELLANEOUS NAMES AND TITLES. 



93 



held in force until revoked by the same process and authority. 
The effect, indeed, of the Act or " Bill of Attainder," was to 
place the accused person, without trial, in the position of a 
criminal who had been tried upon the Charge of Treason, and 
convicted upon regular evidence. 

Augmentation :— an honourable addition to an heraldic Com- 
position, which is distinct and complete in itself, and conveys 
emphatically a definite signification of its own : such as the 
Union Device of the United Kingdom, added as an " Augmenta- 
tion of Honour" to the Arms of the Duke of Wellington; 
see No. 614, Chap. XXVIII., Sect 1. Complicated Augmenta- 
tions, which assumed the condition of a series of quarterings, 
were granted by Henry VIII. to his successive Consorts, for 
the purpose rather of heraldic display than of significant dis- 
tinction, thus most seriously affecting the historic truthfulness 
and the independent authority of Heraldry in England.: see 
Chap. XIX., Sect. 5. 

Azure : — the Colour Blue. 

Badge: — an heraldic Device, having a distinctive significa- 
tion of its own, and borne alone without being charged upon a 
Shield : see Chap. XVII., Sect. 1. 

Banner: — a Square Flag, emblazoned in the middle ages 
with a complete Coat of Arms, which was the distinctive Ensign 
of a Knight-Banneret, and also of the higher Orders of Military 
Chiefs. The Boll of Caerlaverock gives the Blazon of the 
Banners of the Priuces, Nobles and Knights who were present 
at the Siege of that Border Stronghold in the year l;400, under 
the Royal Banner of Edward I. This term ought to be re- 
tained and used by us for the " Standards" of our Cavalry, and 
for the Flag that we style " the Royal Standard," which really 
is the 14 Koyal Banner :" see Chap. XVIII. 

Banneret, or Knight-Banneret : — a knight, who, for good 
service under the Royal Banner, was advanced by the King to 
a higher Order of Knighthood on the Field of Battle. From 



Digitized by Google 



94 



MISCELLANEOUS NAMES AND TITLES. 



that time ho would bo entitled to bear, and would bo distin- 
guished by a Banner instead of a Pennon. 

Baron:— &amp; Husband, tho Wife in Heraldry being styled 
Femmc. 

Baron : — a Title and Hank of Nobility derived from the 
early days of English History, and in a peculiar manner asso- 
ciated with the memories of tho olden time. It corresponds 
with the Thane of the Anglo-Saxons. 

A Baron now holds the lowest Rank in tho British Peerage. 
Ho is styled " My Lord," and is 44 Right Honourable." Tho 
Coronet of a Baron has six large Pearls, set separately upon a 
jewelled Circlet of gold, of which number four only are apparent 
in representations. Tho Cap is of Crimson Velvet, guarded 
with Ermine, and is surmounted by a gold Tassel. This 
Coronet, No. 254, was first granted by Charles II., before 




No. 254. 



whoso time the Barons wore plain golden Circles. The Mantle, 
or Robe of State, is Scarlet, and has two Doublings of Ermine. 
See Coronet, and Pi LXIV. 

Baroness : — the wife of a Baron. Sho is styled " My Lad}-," 
and is " Right Honourable." Her Coronet is the same as that 
of her Husband 

Baronet:— an hereditary Rank, lower than the Peerage, in- 
stituted by James I., a.d. 1612. Baronets, as originally 
created, were either 44 of Ulster," or 44 of Nova Scotia." 

Tho armorial Ensign of the former is the Badge of Ulster, — 
org., a sinister hand, couped at the wrist and appaumee. gu., No. 177, 



Digitized by Google 



MISCELLANEOUS NAMES AND TITLES. 



95 



PI. IX., borne generally upon a small Shield of Pretence. The 
Scottish Baronets of Nova Scotia wore authorized to augment 
their own Arms, either on a canton or in an inescutcheon at 
their pleasure, with the Arms of that Province, — org., on a saltire 
az.y the Royal Arms of Scotland. Supporters : Dexter, — the Unicorn 
of Scotland; Sinister, — a savage Man ppr. ; Crest,— two hands con- 
joined, the one naked, the other armed in mail, a laurel-branch and a 
thistle issuing between them; Motto,—** Munit hcec, et altera vincitr 
In practice, the external accessories were and are generally 
omitted. By a grant from Charles I. the Nova Scotia Baronets 
are entitled to wear upon an oval Badge, pendent from an orange 
ribbon, the Arms of Nova Scotia (as above), without the Sup- 
porters or Crest, the Badge itself being ensigned with an Impe- 
rial Crown, and encircled with the Motto, — " Fax mentis honestae 
gloria." All Baronets now are M of the United Kingdom." 

Basinet:— &amp; Close-fitting steel covering for the head. See 
Helm. 

Bath, Order of the . —see Chap. XX. 
Bath : — see Herald. 

Bearing : — any heraldic Device or Figure, or a complete 
Coat of Arms. 

Bishop : — the Bishops in number are twenty-one for England, 
four for Wales, ten for Ireland, one for Sodor and Man, and 
forty for the Colonies. The Bishops of England and Wales 
are all Peers Spiritual of Parliament, except always the 
Bishop last consecrated. Also the Irish Prelates are Spiritual 
Peers alternately, four in each session of Parliament. Tho 
Bishop of London is always a Privy-Councillor, and therefore 
is ** Right Honourable." He has precedence of all his Brethren. 
Next in Order are tho Bishops of Durham and Winchester. 
The others rank according to seniority of Consecration. All 
the Bishops are "Right Reverend Fathers in God," and 
Bishops "by Divine Permission." They are styled : 44 My Lord 
Bishop." 



Digitized by Google 



96 



MISCELLANEOUS NAMES AND TITLES. 



Archbishops and Bishops impalo their own Arms with the 
Arms of their See, the latter being placed to the dexter. They 
have no Supporters, Crest, or Motto, but they ensign their 
Shields with their Mitres. The Arms of Canterbury, are : 
Az.y a Crozier or, the Cross-head org., surmounted by a pall of 
the last, fimbriated and /ringed gold, and charged vrith four 
crosses patee-fitchee sa. In No. 255, PI. XIV., these Arms impalo 
Kempe, gu., three garbs within a bordure engrailed or, for John 
Kempe, Archbishop of Canterbury, Cardinal and Lord High 
Chancellor, who died a.o. 1454. The Arms of the See of 
York, are, Ou., two keys, in saltire, org. : in chief, a Boyal 
Crown or. The Arms of London are, Gu., two swords, in saltire, 
arg., pommels or: those of Durham are, Az., a Cross cantoning 
four lioncels rampt. or: and those of Winchester are, — Ou., two 
keys, add or 8 cd, in bend, the uppermost argent, the other or, a sword 
interposed between them, in bend sinister, of the second, hill and 
pommel gold. See Mitre, and Pastoral Staff; also see Chap. XXI. 

Blazon and Blazonry: — the description and also the repre- 
sentation of any heraldic device, figure, or composition, in 
accordance with the principles and the practice of Ileraldry. 

Blue Mantle .-—see Herald. 

Cadency : — that heraldic distinction of the several members of 
the same family, or of the collateral branches of the same house, 
which is indicated by some Device specially adopted and borne 
for that purpose : see Chapters XV. and XV T. 

Cadet ;— a junior member or branch of a family. 

Canting Heraldry .-—see Armes Parlantes. 

Cardinal's Hat : — is low in the crown, with a broad brim, 
and of a scarlet colour, with two long pendent cords, curiously 
knotted and intertwined and tasselled. It appears above 
certain shields of arms of the mediaeval hierarchy. 

Clarenceux .-—see Herald. 

Coat of Arms: — a complete and distinctive heraldic composi- 
tion. The expression is evidently derived from the mediaeval 



Digitized by Google 



"MI S C ElflfAKEOU S CHARGE S . 

IX* A XT MATE OBJECTS AND AXIMATJE BEINGS. 




Digitized by Google 



Digitized by Google 



MISCELLANEOUS NAMES AND TITLES. 



97 



usage of embroidering the armorial insignia of a noble or knight 
upon the surcoat, jupon, or tabard which ho wore over his 
armour. 

Collar : — an Ornament to be worn about the neck, and indi- 
cative of certain rank, office, and position. Seo Chap. XX. 
College of Arms .-—see Herald. 

Colours :— Naval and Military Flags. The term is now used, 
not only in a general acceptation, but also specifically to dis- 
tinguish the Mags of the Infantry from those (styled 
** Standards M ) of the Cavalry. Shakespeare uses the word 
" Colours " to denote Military Flags. See Chap. XVIII. 

Coins : — the Heraldry that may bo learned from both 
British and Foreign Coins is of the utmost valno, sinco it is 
always historically correct, and moreover it invariably exem- 
plifies contemporary heraldic feeling and usago. Seo Chap. 
XXIV. 

Compounded Anm : — Arms formed by tho Combination of 
two or more distinct bearings, in such a manner as to produce 
a single composition. This process has been adopted only in 
rare instances (as in the Union Flag of England, Nos. 63, 64), 
since tho introduction of systematic Marshalling by Quartering. 
See Chap. XIV. 

Coronet : — tho Ensign of Frincely and Noble Rank, corre- 
sponding in its own degree with tho Crown of a Sovereign 
Regnant. The Coronets of tho Peers of England are worn by 
them on tho occasion of tho Coronation of their Sovereign. 
They all, in comparatively modern times, have been made to 
enclose a Cap of crimson velvet, lined with ermine, and sur- 
mounted by a tassel of rich gold bullion. Coronets, as insignia 
of Nobility, were evidently in general use by the Nobles of 
England in tho reign of Edward III., but they did not assume 
their present (or, indeed, any) distinctive characteristics until a 
period much nearer to our own times. Seo Prince, Duke, Mar- 
quess, Earl, Viscounty Baron, and Crest, in this Chapter. 

n 



Digitized by Google 



08 



MISCELLANEOUS NAMES AND TITLES. 



Tho examples of Coronets, represented in Nos. 254, 276, 281, 
302, and 317, and also in Nos. 564, 565, and 566, in PL XLL, 
aro drawn in accordance with tho commonly accepted forms of 
these symbols. A more artistic style of design, howover, which 
is in better keeping with true heraldio foeling, is beginning to 
prevail in such representations of Coronets as enjoy the highest 
approval. Coronets of this order, based upon the beautiful 
design of the Crown that encircles tho head of the effigy of 
Edward II. at Gloucester, No. 550, aro sketched in PL LX1V. 

Contoise : — a scarf, worn loose and flowing, attached to tho 
helm with tho crest, but discontinued after the middle of tho 
fourteenth century. A singularly characteristic example occurs 
in the monument of Aymer de Valence, at Westminster ; 
No. 256, PL XV. 

Count, or Compte : — in Latin, 44 Comes," a Continental title and 
rank of Nobility, corresponding with that of 44 Earl." Tho 
Coronet is set round closely with small pearls, slightly raised, 
and it has no Cap. 

Countess .-—the title and rank of the Wife of an Earl, and 
also of a Count. An English Countess is " Right Honourable ;" 
she is styled 44 My Lady ;" and her Coronet is the same as 
that of her husband. 

Courtesy, Titles of: — certain nominal degrees of Kank, that 
are conceded by Royal Grace, and sanctioned by prevailing 
usage, to some of the children of the Peers. Tho term is 
especially applicable to the 44 Second Titles " of their Fathers, 
that are thus borne by 44 Courtesy " by tho eldest sons of Dukes, 
Marquesses, and Earls. 

Crest:— a figure or device, independent and complete in 
itself, worn by the Knights of tho middle ages upon their 
helms and basinets. Crests aro exclusively the heraldic insignia 
of men. See Chap. XVII., Section 2. 

Crest-Coronet .-—see Chap. XVII., Section 2. 

Crest-Wreath .—see Chap. XVII., Section 2. 



Digitized by Google 



MISCELLANEOUS NAMES AND TITLKS. 



09 



Crown:— tho Imperial, of Great Britain. See Chap. XIX., 
Section 6. 

Crowns Foreign : — see Chap. XXXII. 

Crown : — when home as a charge, a Crown generally is drawn 
after tho form of tho crest-coronet, No. 257 a. The arms of 
Sr. Edmund, ono of the most popular national Saints of 
mediaeval England, in the Caerlaverock Roll associated with 
the ensigns of Sr. George and Sr. Edward, are, — azure, three 
crowns, ttco and one, or; No. 271, PI. XIV. This Shield appears 
on the monument of Prince Edmond Plantaoenet, of Langley, 
at King's Langley, in Hertfordshire. Three similar crowns 
on a field gules constitute the arras of the See of Ely. 

Certain varieties and modifications also of ancient Crowns 
aro in use as heraldic accessories, and sometimes they are borne 
as charges in modern Heraldry. The Mural Crown, No. 272, 
a circlo of gold embattled, is associated with military success 



in sieges: it is borno, as a crest of augmentation, with other 
devices, by Sir Edward Kerrison ; and, as both crest and 
charge, by the Baron Seaton. The Naval Crown, No. 273, 
borno by Earl Nelson, as a similar crest, and by Sir George 
Parker as a charge, is formed by the alternate sterns and 
masts of ships set upon a golden cirolo, and significantly de- 
clares its own peculiar moaning. The Croicn Vallary, No. 





No. 272. 



No. 273. 





No. 274. 



No. 275. 



ll 2 



Digitized by Google 



100 



MISCELLANEOUS NAMES AND TITLES. 



274, borne with his crest by Sir Mattijew Harrington, refers 
to the forcing an enemy's entrenchod camp, and is formed of 
small palisades placed upon a golden circle. The Radiated or 
Eastern Crown, called also the Antique Crotcn, No. 275, borno 
as both crest and charge by tho Earl of Seafield, the lato 
lamented Sir James Outram, and Sir John Lawrence, has 
it« rays pointed, in which respect it differs from the heraldic 
Celestial Crown, which has each of its rays charged with a 
star. 

Crozier : — the Cross-headed Pastoral-Staff of an Archbishop, 
which is borne as a Charge in the Arms of tho Sees of Canter- 
bury, Armagh, and Dublin. Characteristic examples occur in 
the Brassos to Archbishops De Waldeby, 1397, Westminster, 
No. 160, PL XV., and Cranley, 1407, New College, Oxford; 
in the Brass to Dean Thomas Nelond, Cowfold, 1443; and in 
the Monument of Archbishop Warham, 1532, at Canterbury. 
The effigy of Archbishop Walter Grey, 1255, in his noble 
Monument at York, has a staff with a crook-head of beau- 
tiful foliage. See Pastoral-Staff, Chap. IX., and No. 159, in 
PI XV. # 

Dalmatic : — a robe of state worn by both Sovereign Princes 
and by the Mediaeval Hierarchy. It was also the distinctive 
vestment of a Deacon. It has rather wide sleeves, and it 
hangs loosely about the person, being open at the sides at the 
lower part. It is exemplified in all episcopal effigies, and is 
represented immediately below the chesuble. It occurs in 
royal effigies, and is shown most clearly in the effigy of Henry 
IV., at Canterbury. 

Diaper : — a surface pattern, which simply imparts a decora- 
tive character, without assuming the distinctive attributes of a 
charge. See Chap. VIII. 

Difference : — a figure or device introduced into heraldic com- 
positions, for the purposo of distinguishing several persons who 
bear the same arms. See Chapters XV. and XVI. 



Digitized by Google 



MISCELLANEOUS NAMES AND TITLES. 



101 



Dimidiation .---the original method of Inqjalement, effected 
by mutually dividing the two shields per pale, and by forming 
(ho compound shield from the union of tho Dcxter-half of one 
of tho divided shields with tho Sinister-half of tho other. 
Seo Chap. XIV. 

Dividing Line*:— seo Chap. III. 

Doubling : — tho lining of a robe : also any enrichment of a 
robe or mantle by means of ermine or other rich material. 

Duke : — next to the Princes and Princesses of tho Blood 
Royal and to the four Archbishops of England and Ireland, 
the highest order and rank of tho British Peerage. 

This title was introduced by Edward III., a.d. 1337, when ho 
created his son Prince Edward, tho Black Prince, Duke of 
Cornwall. Tho second of tho English Dukes was Henry 
Plantagenet, Earl of Lancaster, Derby, and Leicester, and 
Count of Provence, who was created Duke of Lancastkr, a.d. 
1351. A Duke's coronet, as now worn, has eight strawberry- 
leaves of a conventional type, set upon an enriched circle of gold, 
the cap (if a cap be worn) being of crimson velvet, with a golden 
tassel and guarded with ermino ; in representations, five only of 
the leaves are shown, No. 270. The opinion is prevalent that 




No. 270. 



this distinctive form of coronet appears for tho first time, placed 
upon the basinet of Prince John Plantagenet, of Eltham, Earl 
of Cornwall, in his effigy at Westminster, a.d. 1336. That 
there is no foundation for such an origin of the Ducal Coronet 



Digitized by Google 



102 



MISCELLANEOUS NAMES AND TITLES. 



is evident from the effigy itself. Tho decorations of the head- 
pieco and of tho rest of the armour are precisely the same, and 
they are also identical with similar decorations that appear in 
other effigies of about tho samo date. Tho basinet of Prince 
John, No. 277, PI. XVI., however, evidently was onco encircled 
by a plain narrow fillet, which is not the case in any other 
instance, so far as I am awaro. In the effigy at York, of tho 
nephew of John of Eltham, Prince William, second son of 
Edward III., who was born a.d. 1330, and died in childhood, tho 
head has the long and flowing hair encircled by a jewelled fillet, 
represented in No. 278. The effigy of tho Black Prince him- 
self, a.d. 137G, at Canterbury, exhibits on tho basinet what may 
possibly have been tho prototype of tho Duke's strawbony-leaf 
coronet, No. 279. From tho jewelled circlo that encompasses 
the basinet there rise sixteen leaves, with a second series of tho 




No. 279 b. 



same number and much smaller size alternating with the larger 
ones. These leaves differ very slightly from those that are 
carved upon tho armour of John of Eltham, and they are in 
exact accordance with a favourite form of decorative foliage in 
general use when the effigy was executed. In Nos. 277 a, and 
279 A, PI. XVI., I have given enlarged representations of por- 



Digitized by 



DVC:\L CORONETS, BXSINKTS 



C REST WREATHS. 



CHAPTER.'; XIV * XVII 




Digitized by Google 



Digitized by Google 



MISCELLANEOUS NAMES AND TITLES. 103 

tions of the basinets of the two Princes, in order to show more 
plainly the details of their enrichment. No. 279 b shows the 
basinet of the Black Prince, with its coronet and camail, as 
seen from the front Lionel Plantagenet, Duko of Clarence, 
who died a.d. 13G8, in his will bequeathed 44 Tioo Golden 
Circles" with one of which ho states that ho himself had been 
M created a Duke," while with the other his elder brother, tho 
Black Prince, had been 44 created a Prince." It would seem 
that for a while tho coronets of both Dukes and Earls were 
decorated rather after an arbitrary taste, than in accordance 
with any established rule. Indeed, moro than a century after 
the death of tho Black Prince, the effigies of Joun de la 
Pole, K.G., Duko of Suffolk, and his wife Elizabeth Plan- 
tagenet, sister of Edward IV., have Coronets, No. 280, PI. 
XVI., of Fleurs de lys, alternating with clusters of three small 
balls. Possibly, the Fleurs do lys here may denote tho Lady 
to have been a Princess. See Coronet, and PI. LXIV. 

Tho Latin equivalent of Duko is 44 Dux." A Duko is styled 
44 Your Grace," and he is 44 Most Noble ;" all his sons aro 
44 Lords," and all his daughters 44 Ladies ;" but his eldest son 
bears his father's 44 second title," and accordingly ho ranks as a 
Marquess, and generally bears that title. See Chap. XXVII. 

Tho Mantle or parliamentary robe of a Duko is scarlet, and it 
has four doublings of ermine. Thero aro twenty English Duke- 
doms, seven Scottish, and one Irish. 

Ducal Coronet, or Crest-Coronet :— see Chap. XVII., Section 2. 

Ducltess .-—the wife of a Duko. Sho is styled 44 Your Grace," 
and is 44 Most Noble." Her Coronet is tho samo as that of her 
husband. 

Earl : — a titlo and rank of Nobility, in Latin 44 Comes," now 
the third in tho order of the British Peorago, but the highest title 
and rank of tho English Nobles "post conqucstum" until tho year 
1337, when tho Black Prince was created Duke of Cornwall. 
Tho 44 Earl " of England was identical with tho 44 Comptc " or 



Digitized by Google 



104 MISCELLANEOUS NAMES AND TITLES. 

" Count " of France ; and while Norman-French was in use in 
this country, the English "Earls" were styled "Counts' 1 in 
England as well as on the Continent. These powerful Barons 
succeeded to the Tiianea of tho Saxons, their own peculiar title 
being of Danish origin. 

An Earl is 44 Right Honourable," and is styled 44 My Lord." 
His oldest son bears his father's 44 second title," and therefore is 
generally styled " Viscount ;" his other sons are 44 Honourable," 
but all his daughters are 44 Ladies." See Chap. XXVII. 




No. 281. 

The Coronet of an Earl has eight lofty rays of gold rising 
from a golden circlet, each of which upon its point supports 
a largo pearl ; also between each pair of rays, at their bases, 
there is a golden strawberry-leaf. In representation, five of 
the elevated pearls and four of the leaves are apparent; No. 
281. The cap is the same as in the other Coronets. Tho scarlet 
parliamentary robe has three doublings of ermine. See Coronet, 
and No. 281 a, PI. LXIV. 

In the monumental effigies of noble personages which yet 
remain from the middle ages, there are many highly interesting 
examples of the varieties of Coronets worn by the Earls of those 
days and their Countesses, before this Coronet had assumed its 
present definite and fixed character. I must bo content to refer 
to a few examples only. The Crest of Kiciiard Beauchamp, 
Earl of Warwick, No. 265, PI. XLL, a.d. 1439, in his effigy at 
Warwick, rises from a plain circlet that is surmounted by a 



Digitized by Google 



MISCELLANEOUS NAMES AND TITLES. 



105 



scries of pearls slightly raised, but without any strawberry- 
leaves. The Earl and Countess of Arundel, at Arundel, 
early in the fifteenth century, have remarkably rich Coronets, 
No. 282 : the Earl's has a series of leaves and of clusters of 




No. 282.— Coronet of Thomas Fitzalan, Earl of Arundel : a.d. 1445. 

three small balls alternating, all of them being equally raised to 
a considerable height ; the Coronet of the Countess differs in 
having tho raised groups set alternately with singlo balls that 
are less elevated. Later in the century, a.d. 1487, another Earl 
and Countess of Arundel have Coronets, No. 283, formed 
entirely of the conventional architectural leaves of the period. 




No. 283. 



Similar leaves, no less than thirteen in number, rise to a slight 
and uniform elevation along tho front of the ample Coronet, 
No. 284, PI. XLL, of Isabel Plantaoenet, Countess of Essex, 
in her Brass at Little Easton in Essex, a.d. 1483. And, once 
more, at llever in Kent, a.d. 153G, the Brass to Sir T. Boleyn, 
K.G., Earl of Wiltshire and Ormonde, represents tho maternal 
grandfather of Queen Elizabeth in the Insignia of the Gartor 



Digitized by Google 



10G MISCELLANEOUS NAMES AND TITLES. 

and wearing a rich Coronet, the circle of which is set with 
small pearls, not raised, and in contact, and so numerous that 
upwards of twenty are displayed ; No. 285, PI. XLI. 

Ermine : — \ 1 

Ermines: — I Heraldic Furs. See Chap. IV. 

Erminois : — J 

Escutcheon :— an Heraldic Shield. Seo Chap. III. 

Escutcheon of Pretence :— a small Shield charged upon the 
Field of another Shield ; as in Nos. 388 r and 388 g, PI. XXVII. 

Esquire: — a title of honourable distinction, in rank below that 
of Knight Esquires are personal companions and attendants 
of tho Knights of the Orders of Knighthood: such are the 
Esquires of tho Order of the Bath, who have their stall- 
plates in Westminster Abbey. Amongst other Esquires are 
all attendants upon the Person of the Sovereign: all eldest 
sons of Baronets and Knights : all eldest sons of tho younger 
sons of Peers : all persons holding commissions direct from tho 
Crown, but not being of rank lower than Captain : all Royal 
Academicians, and Barristers-at-Law : also all Bachelors of Law 
and Physic and Masters of Arts. See Chap. XXVII. 

Femme: — tho Wife, as distinguished from tho Baron her 
Husband. 

Fcssc-Point : — the central point of a Shield. Seo Chap. III., 
No. 8 M. 

Field: — the surface of a Shield or of its Parts, or of any 
Charge or Object 
Furs .-—see Chap. IV. 

Garter : — the most celebrated Order of European Knight- 
hood. See Chap. XX., Section 7. 
Garter: — see Herald. 

Garter :— a strap or riband, fastened with a buckle in such a 
manner as to form a circle, and having tho end depending. 
Such a Garter may bo of any tincture, and it may bo assumed 
for the purpose of being charged with any motto. It was known 



Digitized by Google 



Digitized by Google 



SHIEI/DS OP ARMS. 



DE GENEVILLE TKIMTY HOI SE KARL POILETT 




STANLEY MLR OF MAN CAYEXDJ8H 




DOUGLAS CANTERBURY KBMPB ST EDMUND 




UAMOYS K CAMOVS MORTIMER HENRY V 




Digitized by Google 



MISCELLANEOUS NAMES AND TITLES. 



107 



to Heralds, and in use as an heraldic device, beforo tho institu- 
tion of tho Order. 

The Garter of the Order is azure, bordered with gold, and 
having a golden buckle and appendages. In letters of the same 
precious metal it is charged with the motto, — IIoni : soit : qui : 
mal: y : pENSS^M3ince the year 1350, this Garter has occasionally 
been plaoed about the Shield of England, as in No. 286, 
which represents the arms of Edward III. as they are blazoned 
upon his monument ; the Garter and Motto, however, aro added 
to the shield of arms, for it is a very singular circumstance 
that none of the insignia of the Order appear in the monuments 
of either Edward III. or tho Black Prince. Tho Garter 
of the Order also oncircles the shield of arms of every Knight 
of the Order. A shield thus gartered appears in tho fine Brass 
to the Baron Camoys, K.G., a.d. 1424, at Trotton in Sussex. 
This Brass also exemplifies the heraldic usage which restricts 
the knightly ensign of the Garter to tho shield of tho Knight 
himself. Accordingly, above the heads of both Lord and Lady 
Camoys, on either side of the two compartments of their doublo 
canopy, aro two shields ; of which ono is charged with Camoys 
only, or, on a chief gu. y three plates, and is gartered, No. 287, 
and the other bears Camoys impaling Mortimer, No. 288, 
PI. XIV. The two shields represented in Nos. 287 and 288 
show the relative sizes of the originals. In the effigy of Lord 
Camoys, tho Garter is adjusted about tho loft log, as in No. 
288 A, PI. XLIII. Tho canopy of tho Brass at Constance 
Cathedral to Robert Hallam, Bishop of Salisbury, a.d." 1417, 
is enriched with a gartered shield of tho Royal Arms, No. 289i 
V\. XIV. ; the Flours do lys are three in number, and the 
shiold is environed with rays: again, at Magdalene College, 
Oxford, the shield of the Founder, William de Waynflete, 
Bishop of Winchester, as Prelate of tho Garter, is encircled 
by this ensign of the Order. Many admirablo examples of 
the adjustment of the insignia of the Garter occur in monu- 



Digitized by Google 



10ft 



MISCELLANEOUS NAMES AND TITLES. 



mental effigies : as in that of Richard Beauciiamp, Earl of 
Warwick, 1439; of Sir K. Harcourt, at Stanton ITarcourt, 
1471 ; of John i&gt;e la Pole, Duko of Suffolk, No. 200, PL 
XLIV., at Wingfiold, 1431; and of Sir Thomas Boleyn, at 
Ilever, 153G. Tho Mantle is represented in all these examples, 
except the first. Sir Thomas Boleyn also wears tho Collar of 
tho Order. Sir R. Harcourt wears tho Yorkist Collar of the 
Suns and Roses, having the white Lion of the Mortimers as 
a pendent; No. 291, PI. XLIV, : and, what is remarkable, in 
her effigy, Lady Harcourt wears tho Garter of the Order 
buckled about her left arm, No. 292, precisely as it is worn by 
Her Majesty the Queen. See Chap. XX., Section 7. 
Garter-Plate .-—see Stall-Plate, 

Gonfannon : — a Flag suspended from a transverse bar 
attached to a staff, and commonly swallow-tailed at tho M fly," 
as in No. 293, PL XXIX. 

Grand Quarters : — the primary sections of a quartered Shield. 
See Chap. III., No. 16. 

Gules : — the Colour Bed. 

Hatchment :— the Armorial Bearings of a deceased person, 
usually enclosed within a black lozenge-shaped frame, and placed 
upon a house-front. When a Hatchment is erected on tho 
death of a Husband, the Dexter half of tho Field of the Hatch- 
ment itself is Sable, tho Sinister being Argent. On the death 
of a Wife, this order of the Tinctures is reversed. The Whole 
of its Field is Sable, when a Hatchment bears the arms of a 
Widotcer, a Widow, or an Unmarried Person. In the blazoning 
of Hatchments all the rules of Marshalling are to be carefully 
observed. Tho Tinctures, Argent and Sable, of tho Field of 
Hatchments will require to be thoughtfully adjusted, when 
there are many quarterings and other heraldic combinations. 
See Chaps. XIV. and XXX. It is customary to place on a 
Hatchment some brief legend of a religious character, in place 
of the Motto of the deceased. 



Digitized by Google 



MISCELLANEOUS NAMES AND TITLES. 



100 



Helm, Heaume, or Helmet: — the defence for the Head. In 
the middle ages, the Knights wore a second Helm of ample 
dimensions and great strength when in actual action, whether 
in the Field or the Lists. This great Helm was commonly 
made to rest upon tho shoulders, and was secured to the 
Knight's person by a chain, as in the Brass to Sir R. de Trump- 
INGTON. In monumental effigies the great Helm frequently 
forms a characteristic pillow for tho head of the deceased 
warrior, and it is adorned with its Crest, Wreath, and Mantling. 
Occasionally, after the year 1425, tho smaller Holm is similarly 
used, and tho effigy has the Head uncovered. Beneath the 
great Helm the head was protected by a Coif of Mail, and 
sometimes also by a species of close-fitting steel cap. A small 
Helm, known as a Basinet, was introduced early in tho four- 
teenth century, from which a Tippet-like defence of Mail, 
called the Camail, hung down and covered the neck and 
shoulders. The Basinet and Camail of tho Black Prince are 
shown in No. 279 b, p. 102 ; see also other examples in PI. XVI. 
Tho Camail was superseded by a Gorget of plate about tho 
year 1408. 

Modern Heralds place the Helm, as an accessory, above a 
shield of arms, and they have both introduced fanciful and 
singularly unbecoming forms of Holms, and have adopted ab- 
surdly complicated rules for their disposition. Such rules 
were altogether unknown in tho palmy days of early Heraldry, 
and they might bo advantageously dismissed from tho heraldic 
usages of our own times. No. 2G4, and Nos. 611, G12 in PI. 
XL V., represent such Holms as might be uniformly introduced 
into all modern Achievements of Arms. No. 264 is the Helm 
of Sir Edward de Thorpe, a.d. 1418, and Nob. Gil and 612 
arc severally tho Helms of the Black Prince, at Canterbury, 
and of Ralph, Lord Bassett, K.G., upon his Garter-Plate. 
Seo Chap. XVII., Section 2. Tho rules at present generally 
observed are as follows : Tho Helm of tho Sovereign to be of 



Digitized by Google 



no 



MISCELLANEOUS NAMES AND TITLES. 



Gold, and to stand affrontec, being guarded with six Bars, No. 
294. The Helm of Princes and Nobles to be of Silver, decorated 




No. 2G4.— Helm, Crest, &amp;c, of Sir E. de Thorpe. 

with Gold; to stand tn profile, and to show five Bars only, 
No. 295. The Helm of Baronets and Knights to bo of Steel, 




No. 294. No. 295. 



adorned with Silver, and to stand affronth, having the Vizor 
raised and without Bars, No. 290. Tho Helm of Esquires and 
Gentlemen to have the Vizor closed, and to stand in profile, No. 
297. 

Heralds: — tho Officers who preside ovor the Modem 



Digitized by Google 



MISCELLANEOUS NAMES AND TITLES. 



Ill 



HERALDRY of England, and who derivo both their titles and 
their official duties from times long passed away, as their 



predecessors of tho middle ages were themselves officially 
the descendants and representatives of the Koyal Messengers 
and Ambassadors of Antiquity. 

The exclusive privilego of deciding officially respecting Rights 
of Arms and Claims for Descent was bestowed upon the Horalds 
by Edward III., and about the year 1425 they were regularly 
constituted a Corporate Body. Their official residenco, situated 
between St. Paul's Cathedral and tho Thames, stands upon the 
site of Derby Ilouse, which was given to them by Mary and 
Philip, and was afterwards destroyed in the Great Fire. 

The College of Arms, or Heralds' College, as at present 
constituted, consists of Three Kings-of-Arms, entitled Garter, 
Clarcnceux, and Norroy ; of these Garter is tho Chiof, and 
Clarenceux and Norroy havo jurisdiction severally to tho South 
and North of the Tront : of 

Six Heralds, entitled Windsor, Chester, Lancaster, Somerset, 
York, and Richmond: and of Four Pursuivants, Rouge Croix, 
Rouge Dragon, Bluemantle, and Portadlis. 

There is another King-of-Arms, styled Bath, or Gloucester, who 
has not a place in the Horaldic Chapter, whoso jurisdiction ex- 
tends to the Principality of Wales. There are also two other 
Heraldic " Kings"— Lord Lyon, for Scotland, and Ulster, for 




No. 290. 



No. 2U7. 



Digitized by Google 



112 



MISCELLANEOUS NAMES AND TITLES. 



Ireland. Tho Kings-of-Ailms have a Crown composed of sixteen 
oak leaves, No. 208, Chap. XXI., set erect upon a golden circle, 
nine of which leaves appear in representations. The Crown 
encloses a Cap of crimson satin turned up with Ermine, and it 
is surmounted by a golden Tassel ; and on the Circle itself is tho 
Legend, Miserere met Deus secundum magnam misericordiam tuam. 
Tho Herald Kings also have their own official Arms, which they 
impale on the dexter side with their paternal Arms. See Chap. 
XXI. 

Tho Official Habit of all the Heralds is a Tabard, or sleeved 
Surcoat, upon which the Royal Arms are emblazoned, tho 
Blazonry being repeated on the Front, Back, and Sleeves. All 
the Heralds also wear, as part of their Official Insignia, the 
Lancastrian Collar of SS. See Tabard, in this Chapter, and 
Chap. XX. 

At the Head of the whole Heraldic Brotherhood, having 
his high Commission direct from the Sovereign, is the Earl 
Marsiial of England. This Office is held by the Duke of 
Norfolk, and it is hereditary in his family. The Arms of 
his Grace quarter tho hereditary Insignia of Howard, Brother- 
ton, Warren, and Mowbray, and behind fho Shield, crossed 
in saltire, are two Marshal's Staves or, enamelled at the ends 
sable; No. 229, Chap. XXVII. For the blazon of tho 
Arms of the Heralds' College, see Chap. XXL, Section 7, 
and the Example, No. 602, at tho commencement of Chap. 
XXVI. The Heralds of Scotland, in addition to the 44 Lord 
Lyon," are entitled, May, Rothesay, Marchmont, Albany, Boss 

■ 

and Snowdon, with six Pursuivants. 

Tho present duties of Heralds comprise Grants of Arms; 
the Tracing and Drawing up of Genealogies; tho Recording 
Arms and Genealogies in the Registers of the Heralds' Collego ; 
recording the Creation and Succession of Peers and others, 
with all similar matters, including tho Direction of Royal 
Pageants and Ceremonials. 



Digitized by Google 



MISCELLANEOUS NAMES AND TITLES. 



113 



Honor Point :— seo Chap. III., and No. 8 l. 
Hospitallers .-—seo Chap. XX. 

Illumination: — for a full and most satisfactory notice of this 
beautiful Early Art, now happily revived, I must refer to the 
** Manual of Illumination," by my lamented friend, Mr. J. J. Lalng, 
published by Messrs. Winsor and Newton : see Chap. XXV. 

Impalement : — the vertical division of a Shield into two or 
more equal parts, and the placing two or more distinct Coats 
of Arms severally in those parts. This is the prevailing 
arrangement for uniting the arms of a Husband and a Wife. 
In the Impalement of a Bordure, that Subordinacy now is 
always dimidiated — that is, tho Bordure does not extend to the 
impaled side of the Shield. It is the same also with an impaled 
Tressure. See Dimidiation, and Chap. XIV. 

Jousts : — tournaments. 

Jupon : — a Short Surcoat fitting tho person, without sleeves, 
worn over their armour by the Nobles and Knights of tho 
Middle Ages, from about a.d. 1360, to about a.d. 1405. The 
Jupon was generally of rich materials, and emblazoned with 
tho heraldic insignia of the wearer; it was also almost in- 
variably invected or jagged at tho bottom. Amongst very 
many others, fine examples exist in the Effigies of the Black 
Prince, at Canterbury, and of tho Earl , of Warwick (a 
Brass, a.d. 1401), at St. Mary's, Warwick. The Surcoats 
represented in the Effigies of John de Hastings, Earl of 
Pembroke, No. 338, PL XXI., and of Henry Plantagenet, 
Duke of Lancaster, No. 488 a, PI. LXIII., both from the Brass 
at Elsyng in Norfolk, are somewhat longer than the Jupon. 

King-at-Arms : — seo Herald. 

Knight ;— in Latin, " Eques a mounted Warrior, who in 
the Middle Ages was a man of military rank, entitled to bear 
a Pennon and a Shield of Arms, and further distinguished by 
his Golden Spurs. When used alone, the term now denotes a 
rank somewhat roscmbling that of a Baronet, except in tho 

i 



Digitized by Google 



114 



MISCELLANEOUS NAMES AND TITLES. 



important particular that it is not hereditary. The Orders of 
Knighthood of our own day, like those of the days of Mediaeval 
Chivalry, are Fraternities of Honour : see Chap. XX. 

Knight Banneret ;— see Banneret. 

Lambrequin : — see Mantling. 

Lists : — enclosed spaces for holding Tournaments. 

Livery Colours .-—colours adopted by certain eminent person- 
ages and families, for various decorative uses: as, scarlet and 
white, by the Plantagenets ; blue and white, by the Lancas- 
trians ; blue and crimson, by the House of York ; white and 
green, by tho Tudors ; gold and scarlet, by the Stuarts, &lt;fec. 

Maintenance, Cap of: — also called a Chapeau of Estate, was 
an early symbol of high Dignity and Rank. It appears sup- 
porting the Crest of the Black Prince at Canterbury, No. 263, 
PI. XXVI. This Cap is still retained in use, and is occa- 
nionally placed beneath modern Crests in place of the customary 
^ reath. In form, the Cap of Maintenance somewhat resem- 
bles the modern Scottish " Glengary," but it is made of Crimson 
Velvet, and guarded with Ermine; No. 133 a, PI. VIII. : see 
also No. 520, PI. XXX; No. 267, PI. XXVI., and Nos. 451, 
521, PI. XLI. : also No. 199 a, p. 62. 

Mantle :— a long and flowing Robe, worn in the Middle Ages 
over the armour. The Mantle also constitutes an important 
part of the official Insignia of the Knightly Orders. See Chap. 
XX. In the Middle Ages, Ladies of Rank wore similar 
Mantles, and in many instances they were decorated with 
heraldic charges, in which case the Mantle generally bore either 
tho Impaled Arms of the Lady and her Ilusband, or her Hus- 
band's Arms only. Numerous examples exist in Monumental 
Effigies ; as in the Brass at Enfield, A.n. 1446, to Lady Tiptoft, 
No. 300, PI. XVII. : in this instance, however, the Mantle is 
charged with the impaled arms of the father and the mother of 
the wearer, Edwarm Baron Chkrlton of Powvs, and Alianork 
Holland. 



Digitized by Google 



MARSH XUUIXG. 




MISCELLANEOUS NAMES AND TITLES. 



115 



Mantling, or Lambrequin :— a small Mantle, generally of 
crimson velvet or silk and lined with ermine, with tassels, 
attached to the Basinet or Helm, and hanging down over the 
shoulders of the wearer. In Heraldry, the Mantling is often 
so adjusted that it forms a background for the Shield and its 
accessories, and thus with them it constitutes an Achievement 
of Arms; No. 523, Chap. XVII.: or, it simply hangs in such 
a manner as to cover the back of the Helm, as in No. 301, PL I., 
tho Achievement of Sir John Harsyck, a.d. 1384, at Southacre, 
Norfolk ; the Arms are, or, a chief dancettee az. ; and the Crest 
is, a panache of turkey's feathers sa., rising out of a hoop or : 
see also No, 012, PI. XLV., and No. 264, p. 110. Another 
early example of a Mantling appears in tho Brass to Sir Hugh 
Hastings, a.d. 1347, at Elsyng, Norfolk. The Knightly 
Mantling being necessarily much exposed, was constantly cut 
and torn in the melee ; this is indicated by the jagged edges 
and irregular form given to their Mantlings by Heralds. 

In No. 408, the Mantling of John Daubygne' a.d. 1346, is 
arranged after a peculiarly graceful manner. This example 
illustrates the usage, prevalent in both the fourteenth and fif- 
teenth centuries, of differencing Mantlings with the same Charges 
that mark Cadency in Shields of Arms. This Mantling is 
semee of mullets. See Nos. 405, 406, 407, PI. XXVI II. The 
Mantling of George Plantagenet, K.G., Duke of Clakence, is 
semee of the white roses of tho House of York, No. 451, PI. 
LI. (Garter-Plato). No. 450, also in Plate LI., represents two 
portions of the Mantling of Henry Bourchier, K.G., Earl of 
Essex, who died in 1483 ; here the crimson mantling itself is 
billeiUe, or, and the lining is semee of small water -bougets, sable ; 
(Garter-Plate, and Brass at Little Easton in Essex). The 
Mantling of John Bourchier, K.G., Lord Berners (died 
1449), is also btUett^e y and its lining is semee alternately of Bour- 
chicr knots and toatcr-bougets ; No. 450 a., PI. LXV. Sir R. 
Habcourt, K.G.. has his ermine-lined Mantling semee of quatre- 

i 2 



Digitized by Google 



116 



MISCELLANEOUS NAMES AND TITLES. 



foils, (Garter-Plato). Tho Mantling of Richard Widville, E.G., 
Earl Rivers, tho fathor-in-law of Edward IV., is semSe of 
trefoils; No. 450 b. William, Lord Hastings, K.G. (executed 
by Richard III.) has his Mantling adorned with sprigs of 
flowers : James, Earl Douglas, tho first Scottish K.G., has 
both his Mantling and the Cap of Maintenance which sup- 
ports his Crest adorned with slips of leaves and flowers : and 
the Mantling of John, Lord Beaumont, K.G. (a.d. 1397), like 
tho field of the Beaumont shield, is semee de lys, the lining 
being ermine; No. 450 c, PI. LXIV. (Garter-Plates). And, 
once more, Henry V., who, as Prince of Wales, above his 
{Shield in his Garter-Plate displays Helms and Crowns of both 
France and England, from his Helm of France has the Mantling 
semie de lys. (Garter-Plate). 

The Mantling of Sir Hugh Courtenay, K.G. (died before 
1370), is a singular variety, being formed of Swan's feathers, 
like his Crest, inverted, and terminating in two golden tassels ; 
(Garter-Plate). The achievement of Humphrey de Bohun, 
K.G., last Earl of Hereford, who died a.d. 1373, has a good 
example of a plain Mantling lined with ermine, No. 629, PL 
LXVI. : it must be understood, however, that the Garter-Plates 
which are charged with these achievements of arms wore not 
blazoned and fixed in their places in St. George's Chapel until 
several years after tho commencement of the second quarter of 
the fifteenth century. 

As a general rule, the Mantling is of the Metal and Colour 
of tho arms; or, if there be more than one metal and colour, 
of those that are of the chief importance. This rule obtains in 
tho Heraldry of the Continent. See Chap. XXXII. The 
Mantling may, perhaps, be considered to have been derived 
from the Contoise, worn by the Knights of an earlier period. 
See dmtoise : see also Chap. XVII., Section 2. 

Marquess : — (somotimes also Marquis), tho Second Order of 
English Nobility, in rank next to that of Duke. Tho first 



• 



ACHIEVEMENT OF ARMS 




Digitized by Google 



MISCELLANEOUS NAMES AND TITLES. 117 

Marquess in England was Robert de Verb, Earl of Oxford, 
who by Richard II., a.d. 1387, was created Marquess of 
Dublin. This Rank and Title then, with one other exception 
only, lay dormant until the time of Henry VI. A Marquess 
is Most Honourable," and is styled " My Lord Marquess ;" 
his sons aro all " Lords," and his daughters " Ladies," his 
eldest son bearing the Second Title of his father. The Coronet 
is a circlet of gold, from which there ariso four strawberry- 
leaves and as many pearls alternately, all of them being but 
slightly raised, and of equal height ; in representations two of 
tho pearls and three of the leaves aro seen, No. 302 : also. No. 




No. 302. 



3f&gt;2 a, PI. LXIV. Tho Cap is the same as in the other Coronets. 
Tho Mantle of Parliament is Scarlet, and it has three and a half 
doublings of Ermine. Tho wife of a Marquess is styled a Jtfinr- 
chioness. See Coronet. 

Marshilling : — tho arrangement and aggroupment of Heraldic 
Compositions. See Chap. XIV. 

Medals : — honourable insignia, bestowed for meritorious 
service in tho Navy and Army, and also for eminent worth or 
noble conduct of whatever kind. In very rare instances tho 
Medal itself has an intrinsic value, but the prevailing usage 
is that the worth of this decoration of Honour should consist 
exclusively in its associations. See Chap. XX., Sections 13, 15, 
and 17. 

Melals: — in Heraldry, Gold, Or, and Silver, Argent. 
Merchants' Marks .—devices that were adopted, as a sppciivs 



Digitized by Google 



118 



MISCELLANEOUS NAMES AND TITLES. 



of Mercantilo Heraldry, by the wealthy Merchants of the Middle 
Ages, to whom the use of true heraldic insignia originally was 
not conceded. They repeatedly occur in monumental memo- 
rials, and consist of a monogram of the initials of the Merchant, 
with a compound figure, which is in part a cross, and in part 
is derived from a mast of a ship. These Marks were often 
borne on shields, and they may be considered to be the proto- 
types of the Trade Brands and Marks of our own times. The 
Example, No. 303, PL XIII., is from the Brass to Thomas 
Povmder, A.n. 1525, in the Church of St. Mary Quay, Ipswich. 
In the Brass to William Grevel, a.d. 1401, at Chipping 
Campden, there are both a Merchant's Mark and a Shield of 
Arms, (the shield is represented in No. 396, PI. XXXVII.) ; and 
the Brass to Joun Terri, a.d. 1524, at St. John's, Maddermarket, 
Norwich, has a shield which quarters the arms of a commercial 
guild with a merchants mark. 

Merchants of the Staple,— of London and Calais, incorporated 
by Edward III. See Chap. XXI., Section 10. 

Merchants Adventurers, — of Hamburgh and London, incor- 
porated by Edward I. See Chap. XXL, Section 10. 

Mitre :— the Cap of Official Rank and Dignity, placed above 
their Arms, and used as a Badge of their office by the Arch- 
bishops and Bishops of the Church of England and Ireland, but 
worn only by prelates of the Roman Church. Mitres aro 
always represented as golden, and they are all cleft from the 
summit downwards, so that they terminate in two points. Two 
Infula&gt;, or ribbons fringed at the ends, depend from every Mitre. 
Until recent times all Mitres were so far alike that they were 
without any distinction whatever of ecclesiastical rank : thus, 
one of the finest and richest of the existing early examples is 
the Mitre represented in the Brass to Thomas Delamere, Abbot 
of St Alban's (about a.d. 1375), in the Abbey Church of St. 
Alban : see also the examples at the head of this chapter, of 
which the latest is from the monument of Archbishop Samuel 



Digitized by Google 



MISCELLANEOUS NAMES AND TITLE*. 



110 



Harsnett, a.d. 1631. The Mitres of Archbishops are now gene- 
rally represented rising from ducal coronets, as in No. 307 ; 
but the Mitres of their Graces and also those of the Bishops 
all rise alike from plain golden circlets, in No. 306. See 
Notes and Queries, 2nd Series, viii., 248, and ix., 67, 188, and 295. 
The Bishops of Durham, as nominally Counts Palatine of the 
County of Durham as well as Bishops of the See, had their 
Mitres rising from a similar Coronet, as in No. 308. Curious 
examples of Mitres with Coronets, Feathers, and Crests, appear 




No. 308. 



on the Seals of Thomas de Hatfield, a.d. 1345; of John de 
Fordham, 1382; of Robert de Neville, 1438; and of Richard 



Digitized by Google 



120 



MISCELLANEOUS NAMES AND TITLES. 



Fox, 1494, all of them Bishops of Durham. (Sco tho Plates in 
Surtees' History of Durham.) 

In tho Middle Ages, Mitres underwent several important 
changes in their contour and general aspect At. first very 
low, simple, and concave in outline, during the fourteenth 
century they became more elevated, rich, and splendid. Still 
later, Mitres changed their contour from concave to convex, 
and wero considerably elevated, and thus they assumed their 
presont form and character. In Medieval Effigies and Seals, 
Mitres are constantly represented with characteristic accuracy. 
In No. 309, at tho head of this chapter, I have given outlines 
from somo of those examples for the sake of comparison ; they 
are from tho Brasses to Archbishop Cranley, a.d. 1417, at 
Oxford; Bishop Goodryke, a.d. 1554, at Ely; and Archbishop 
IIarsnett, a.d. 1631, at Chigwell, Essex. 

Monogram: — a single initial or other letter, also a combina- 
tion of several initials or letters, so arranged as to form a 
single compound device. A remarkable series of Monograms is 
carved in the bosses of the vaulted ceiling of the Divinity School, 
Oxford. 

Motto :— a word or a brief epigrammatic sentence, supposed 
to be in some manner characteristic of tho Bearer, and usually 
placed on a scroll either beneath a shield, 'or about a crest. 
The latter position should be adopted when tho Motto has 
evident reference to the crest itself. AVhen no Helm is intro-. 
duced, the Motto may be effectively placed between tho Shield 
and the Crest A Motto may also be charged upon a garter. 
In IToraldry, as a law, a Motto is not held to be hereditary, 
but is supposed to be of a strictly personal character ; in almost 
every instance, however, in actual usage, tho Motto is trans- 
mitted and borne with tho Shield and Crest. Mottoes are not 
borne by Bishops. See Rebus ; and see Chap. XVIL, Section C. 

Mound .-—see Chap. XIX., Section 6. 

Nttrrm : — see Herald. 



Digitized by Google 



XANEOUS NAMES AND TITLES. 



121 



Nova Scotia, Arms of: — see Baronet. 

Or :— tho Metal Gold. 

Orders of Knighthood : — see Chap. XX. 

Ordinary of Arms : — a series of Heraldic Bearings, or Coats 
of Arms, classified and arranged in accordance with the princi- 
pal Charges, and having the names of the Bearers attached. It 
is the reverse of an Armoury. 

Panache : — a Plumo of Feathers, generally those of the 
peacock, set upright, so as to form a Crest. Such a decoration 
for the Helm appears to have been occasionally in use from an 
early period until the concluding quarter of the fifteenth 
century, when waving plumes wore first introduced. The 
Panacho was almost always regarded as a Crest. It appears 
in tho Brass to Lord Ferrers, of Chartley, about a.d. 1410, at 
Morevale, in Warwickshire, No. 267 a, PL XXVI. ; also, but 
not of peacock's feathers, in the sculptured effigy of Sir T. 
Arderne, a.d. 1400, at Elford, in Staffordshire : and again in 
tho Brass to Sir J. Harsyck, a.d. 1384, at Southacre, Norfolk, 
No. 301, PL I. The Mortimers had for their Crest a 
Panache of many azure feathers, rising from a Crest-Coronet ; 
No. 269, PI. XXVI., and No. 270, Chap. XXIV. Another 
example of a Panache is represented in No. 522, which is tho 
Crest of Jonx, Lord Scrope, K.G. See Chap. XXVII., Sec. I. 

Paschal Lamb : — a AY hi to Lamb, passant, represented as 
carrying the Red Cross Banner or Ponnon of St. George. It 
was a device of the Knights Templars. 

Pean :— an heraldic Fur. See Chap. IV. 

Peer : — the goneral titlo of the Nobility of Great Britain, in- 
dicating their equality of rank as a class, as the 44 Nobles," dis- 
tinguished from the 44 Commons," of tho realm. For the 
History, Succession, Honours, Arms, Privileges, &amp;c, of tho Peers, 
I must refer to the " Peerage" by Sir Bernard Burke, Ulster 
King at Arms, published every year, and to the other Peerages. 

Pennon : — a small pointed or swallow-tailed Flag, carried by 



Digitized by Google 



122 



MISCELLANEOUS NAMES AND TITLES. 



every mediaeval Knight upon his own Lance, and which bore 
his own personal Device. The Pennon appears to have been 
adopted in its distinctive character during the reign of Henry 
III. My example, No. 310, PL XXIX., from the Brass to Sir 
John D'Aubernoun, at Stoke Daubernon, Surrey, is of the 
period of Edward L ; it is azure, charged with a chevron and 
fringed or : see Chap. XVIII. 

Pennoncelle :— a long streamer-like Pennon. 

Planta Genista: — the Broom-plant, the celebrated Badge of 
the Plantagenet Princes, which was assumed and borne by Geof- 
frey Plantagenet, Count of Anjou, the Founder of the Plan- 
tagenet Family. In Heraldry, a sprig of the Broom appears 
with its spike-like leaves, its golden blossoms, and its pods, the 
latter sometimes open and disclosing their seeds. The effigy of 
Richard II., at Westminster, has the Dalmatic and Mantle 
diapered with the Plantagenista (No. 240, PI. XII.), and the other 
badges of that unfortunate Prince. The pod of the pea-plant 
is used somewhat after a similar manner in the Brass to 
Walter Pcscod, Merchant, a.d. 1398, at Boston, in Lincolnshire. 

Plume : — see Panache. 

Portcullis .-—see Herald ; also see Portcullis in Chap. IX. 
Potent .—an Heraldic Fur. See Chap. IV. 
Powdering .—scattering irregularly over any field: specially 
applied to small objects. 

Prince and Princess : — see Chap. XIX., Section 6. 
Purpure : — the colour Purple. 

Pursuivant a Herald of the lowest rank. For the sake of 
distinction, the Pursuivants wore their Tabards having the 
sleeves hanging in front and behind, not being allowed to wear 
them as the Heralds wore their sleeves. This singular usage is 
distinctly marked in the representation of the Funeral Proces- 
sion of Queen Elizabeth, in the 44 Vetusta Monumental' vol. iii., 
Plates XVIII. to XXIV. 

Quartering : — the arranging different armorial compositions 



Digitized by Google 



MISCELLANEOUS NAMES AND TITLES. 



12:5 



in those divisions of a shield, which are either four or more than 
four in number. See Chap. XIV. 

Quartering* : — quarterly divisions of a shield ; also the arms 
emblazoned upon such divisions. 

Bebus: — a charge or charges, or any heraldic composition 
which has an allusion to the name of the bearer, or to his 
profession, or his personal characteristics, and thus may bo 
said to speak to the beholder, " non verbis, sed rebus." For 
example, three salmons for the name Salmon ; a spear on a 
bend for Shakspeare, &lt;fec, &amp;c. In the Middle Ages, the Rebus 
was a favourite form of heraldic expression, and many quaint 
and curious examples remain of such devices: for instance, 
the monument of Abbot Bamrydge, at St. Alban's, abounds in 
figures of Hams, each of which has, on a collar about its neck, 
the letters rydoe : these Rams, which are sculptured with 
remarkable spirit, support the Shield of Arms of the Abbey of 
Sr. Alban,— az., a saltire or; Nos. 623, 711, 712, PI. LXXVII.; 
see also Chap. XVII., Section 3, and Chaps. XXIII. and XXX. 
An Ash tree growing out of a Cask or Tun, for the name Ashton, at 
St. John's, Cambridge, is another example of a numerous series. 
The tun, to represent the terminal syllable " ton," was in great 
favour ; see Tun, in Chap. IX. ; thus at Winchester, in the 
Chantry of Bishop Langton, a.d. 1 500, a musical note called 
a long is inserted into a tan, for Langton ; a vine and a tun, for 
his See, Winton ; and a hen sitting on a tun, for his Trior, 
Hunton. In No. 628, drawn from the panelling of the Chan- 
try of Bishop Oldham, a.d. 1519, in Exeter Cathedral, the 
owl with the label in its beak charged with the letters dom, 
forms what was held to bo a Rebus of the Bishop's name— 
Owl-dom, Old-ham. About the same period, in the sculptures 
of Norwich Cathedral, Bishop Walter Lyhart has his Rebus 
many times repeated; it is a stag or hart lying down in a 
conventional representation of water: this is carrying the 
principle of the Rebus about as far as it can be carried. 



Digitized by Google I 



124 



MISCELLANEOUS NAMES AND TITLES. 



Another curious and characteristic example of a Rebus occurs 
in the monument of Sir John Peche\ at Lullingstone, Kent, 




No. 628.— Rebus of Bishop Oldham, Exeter Cathedral. 

• 

a.d. 1522, and also in the stained glass of the chapel in which 
this monument is preserved: the shield of arms of Sir John 
Pech6 (az. t a lion rampt. queue fourche'e erm., crowned or), is sur- 
rounded by branches of a peach-tree, each peach being charged witft 
the letter t ; also the crest, a lion's head crowned, stands upon a 
wreath of peach-branches fruited, the peaches charged as before. See 
Stothard. 

In Westminster Abbey, Abbot Islip's Chapel gives two forms 
of his Rebus ; one, a human Eye, and a small branch or " Slip " 
of a tree ; the other, a man in the act of falling from a tree, 

■ 

and exclaiming, M I slip /" Such heraldic puns are distin- 
guished as Canting Heraldry. This system extends to mottoes, 
as in the well-known instance of the Vernons, whoso motto is 
" Ver non semper viret." 

This Canting Heraldry, which was carried to so strange an 
excess in the sixteenth century, had a prevailing influence un- 
der a much simpler form of expression with the early Heralds. 
A searching investigation, indeed, of the true origin of the 
surnames of the men who in the thirteenth and fourteenth 
centuries bore arms, would go far to show that an allusive 
connection between names and arms was so prevalent, as to 
constitute the general rule. Names have undorgono many 
changes, partly through translation from their original Norman- 



Digitized by Google 



MISCELLANEOUS NAMES AND TITLES. 



125 



French or Latin, partly from a combination of the Latin and 
the Norman-French versions of the same name, and in part 
from variations of orthography; and the armorial devices and 
compositions having also commonly lost their original I Norman- 
French titles and descriptions, the allusive nature of tho 
early Heraldry has ceased to be palpable, and therefore has in 
a great measure ceased to be recognized. It is of the very 
essence of all Heraldry, howovor, that in somo respect or degreo 
it should be allusive — should have in it somothing of the Rebus ; 
otherwise it would not fulfil its aim and purpose of being a 
symbolical language A few examples from the early Rolls of 
Arms will suffice to illustrate the manner in which shields of 
arms were Armes Parlantes in tho olden time : 

A Gross Moline, borne by De Molines, or Molyneux. 

Three Hammers, (French Nortel), by John Martel, and by 
tho Hammertons. 

Two Trumpets, by De Trumpingdon. 

Horseshoes, by De Ferrers. 

Three human hands, by Tremain. 

Three Boars 1 heads, by Swyneburne. 

A Hart, by De Hertley. 

A Bear, by Fitz Urse. 

Rams, by Ramsey. 

Tliree Otters (Frenoh, Loutres), by Luttrel. 

Martlets, by De Merley. 

Hiree Ravens, by Corbett. 

Three Lucics (Lucy, a pike), by De.Lucy. 

Tliree Laurel Leaves, by Leveson. 

Tliree Hedge-Hogs (French, Harrison), by De IIeriz, or 
Harris. (Example on the shield of an effigy at Gonaldston^, 
Notts ; also, as a Badge, in a Brass at Diggeswell, Herts). 

Two Barbels, for De Barre : &amp;c., &amp;c. 

Regalia : — the insignia of Royalty. See Chap. XIX. 

Roll of Arms: — an heraldic record with a blazon of Arms, 



Digitized by Google 



12*5 



MISCELLANEOUS NAMES AND TITLES. 



usually written and illuminated upon a long strip of vellum, 
and rolled up instead of being folded into leaves. The earliest 

* 

English Rolls are of the reign of Henry III. ; and the earlier of 
these contains almost a complete Baronial Armoury of that pe- 
riod, the shields of arms being two hundred and sixteen in number. 

Rose : — the badge of England. Seo Rose in Chap. XL 

Rouge Croix .-—see Herald. 

Rouge Dragon .-—see Herald. 

Sable : — the colour Black. 

St. Alban : — the English Protomartyr. The arms of the 
famous Abbey that bore his name were, az., a saliire or: 
see No. 466, PL LI. A figure supposed to represent Sr. Alban 
appears in the canopy of the Brass to Abbot Dei. am ere, about 
a.d. 1375, still preserved in the Abbey Church of St. Alban. 

St. Andrew : — the Patron Saint of Scotland. His arms are, 
azure, a saliire argent; No. 60, PI. III. 

St. Edmund : — one of the favourite popular Saints of media?val 
England. His arniB are, azure, three crowns, two and one, or; 
No. 271, PL XIV. 

St. Edward, or Edward the Confessor: — another popular 
Saint of the olden time. His arms are, azure, a cross fleurie, 
between five martlets, or. Sometimes the cross is blazoned pa- 
tonce, as in Westminster Abbey ; and sometimes fieureltee, as in 
the stalls at Luton Church in Bedfordshire. There is a fine 
example of this shield, executed in relief, and diapered, in the 
South Choir Aisle of Westminster Abbey, No. 78, PL L ; also, 
another fine example at the entrance to Westminster Hall. 
This coat of arms was impaled by Richard II., Nos. 349, 350, 
PL XXIII. ; No. 536 c, PL LVIH.; and No. 529, PL XXXV.; 
and it was also granted by him to some of his near kinsmen. 
Thus, the arms of the Confessor were granted to Thomas 
Holland, second Earl of Kent and Duke of Surrey, to be 
impaled to the dexter within a bordure ermine; No. 342, PL 
XXII.; to John Holland, K.G., first Duke of Exeter, to be 



Digitized by Google 



MISCELLANEOUS NAMES AND TITLES. 



127 



differenced with a label argent, and impaled to the dexter; 
and to Thomas Mowbray, K.G., first Duke of Norfolk, the 
arms of the Confessor were also granted, with two ostrich fea- 
thers erect, the arms to be impaled to the dexter, without differ- 
ence; Nos. 631, 632, PL LXV. Henry Bohngbroke assumed 
the arms of the Confessor, and impaled them, differenced 
with a label of three points, to the dexter of his own impaled 
shield ; No. 347, Chap. XIV. It was one of the capital charges 
against the Duke of Norfolk, in 1546, that he had assumed 
this coat of arms. See Chap. XV., Martlets. 

St George : — the Patron Saint of England. The incident (if 
any) which led to the association of St. George with England 
is unknown. The arms of this illustrious saint are, argent, a 
cross gules; No. 62, PI. III. I am not able to refer to any 
earlier example of the arms of St. George, as borne by the 
saintly warrior himself, than that which occurs in the Brass to 
Sir Hugh Hastings, at Elsyng, Norfolk, a.d. 1347, No. 311, 
PI. XXIX. In the canopy of this fine Brass, St. George ap- 
pears mounted and transfixing the Dragon, and he has his 
Cross charged upon his Shield, his Surcoat, and the Bardings 
of his charger. Another small figure of St. George on foot, 
with his shield duly charged, is introduced into the canopy of " 
the Brass to Sir Nicholas Hawberk, a.d. 1407, at Cobham, in 
Kent. St. George appears upon the Great Seal of Edward III., 
a.d. 1360 : and in the Roll of Caerlaverock, a.d. 1300, the Ban- 
ner of St. George is mentioned, with the Banners of St. 
Edmund and St. Edward, but these saintly ensigns are not 
blazoned. The arms of St. George are also mentioned in the 
inventory of the Earl of Hereford, a.d. 1322. Each of the 
large shields upon the Monument of Edward III. is charged 
with a Red Cross, but the field now is or and not argent. In 
illuminations of the fourteenth century, a portraiture of St. 
Goorge and the Dragon appears upon some of tho standards of 
England. 



Digitized by Google 



128 



MISCELLANEOUS NAMES AND TITLES. 



St. Michael :— boo Chap. XX., Section 11; also, Chap. XXIV., 
Section 2. 

St. Patrick:— the Patron Saint of Ireland. His Arms aro, 
argent, a saltire gules ; No. 61, PI. III. 

Second Title : — this expression denotes the second in a series 
of dignities, accumulated in tho persons of Peers of the 
higher ranks. Thus, each Poor, in addition to the highest 
rank that ho holds, and by which he is himself known, also 
generally enjoys the several lower ranks besides : for oxample, 
— an Earl may bo also a Viscount and a Baron; a Marquis 
may also bo an Earl, a Viscount, and a Baron; and a Duko 
may hold, with his Dukedom, all tho lower grades of the 
peerage. In any such case, the second in tho order of these 
lesser titles is conceded " by courtesy " to the eldest son of either 
a Duke, a Marquis, or an Earl. 

Shamrock : — the badge of Ireland. 

Shield .--see Chap. III., also Shield in Chap. IX. 

Sinister :— tho left side; see No. 8 in Chap. III. 

S.S., Collar of: — tho Badgo of the Lancastrian Princes 
and their Friends, Partisans, and Dependents : see Chap. XX., 
Section 5. 

Standard :— a Mediaeval Flag, apparently introduced during the 
reign of Edward III., which was always of considerable length 
in proportion to its depth, and was made tapering (sometimes 
swallow-tailed), towards the fly. Standards appear to have 
been always large, but their dimensions were determined by 
the rank of the personages by whom they were displayed. The 
devices charged upon early Standards were not determined 
by any heraldic rule ; but it was a prevalent custom to charge 
them with numerous and varied devices. Edward III. had one 
Standard with figures of St. George and the Dragon; and 
another sem4e of Flenrs-de-lys and Lions, with France ' and 
England quarterly at its head; No. 312, PI. XXIX. The 
Standard of the Earl of Warwick had the Cross of St. George 



Digitized by Google 



MISCELLANEOUS NAMES AND TITLES. 129 
• 

at tho head, and was semee with his Badge of the Bear and 
the Kagged Staff; No. 313, PI. XXXV. Except when they 
bore Royal Devices, tho English Standards of the Tudor era 
universally had the Cross of St. George at their head ; then 
came tho Device, Badge, or Crest of the Owner, with his Motto. 
Standards never bore a regular Coat of Arms. They were dis- 
tributed amongst tho Corps of any Baron, Knight, or other 
Commander, and were displayed without a distinctive or special 
signification (as was so emphatically tho case with both the 
Pennon and the Banner,) as decorative accessories which might 
enhance 44 the pomp and circumstance of War." Examples, 
Nos. 315 and 316, PI. XXIX., are two Standards of Henry 
VIII., drawn from tho curious picture at Hampton Court, repre- 
senting his embarkation at Dover for France, on tho occasion of 
tho 44 Field of the Cloth of Gold." Both display tho Tudor 
Livery Colours, argent and vert ; one has a Fleur-de-lys charged 
upon theso Colours, and the other has the Cross of St. George 
at the Head. In the Funeral Procession of Queen Elizabeth 
there are many curious examples of Tudor Standards : ( Vetust. 
Mon.y iii., 18, &amp;c.) See Chap. XVIII. 

StaU-Plate :— a square or oblong plate of gilt copper, upon 
which the Arms of Knights of the Garter and the Bath are em- 
blazoned, and fixed in thoir stalls in the Chapels of St. George 
at Windsor, and of Henry VII. at Westminster. The arms 
of the Esquires of the Bath are similarly displayed and re- 
corded in the lower range of Stalls. The Stall-Plates of the 
Garter are amongst the most interesting and valuable of tho 
Historical records that the Heraldry of England possesses: 
these Plates are so arranged at Windsor, that tho Shields of 
arms on both sides of the Chapel face towards tho Stalls of the 
Sovereign and the Princo of Wales at the western extremity 
of the choir ; consequently, the Shields on the Prince's side 
sometimes appear to be reversed. 

It is not known whothor Plates with the armorial insignia of 

K 



Digitized by Google 



130 



MISCELLANEOUS NAMES AND TITLES. 



the Knights were fixed in tho Stalls at Windsor at, or soon 
after the first institution of tho Order of the Garter. 
Tho Plates now in existence cannot be assigned to a period 
earlier than tho commencement of the reign of Henry VI. ; the 
forms of tho holms, indeed, tho adjustment of the mantlings, 
and tho drawing of tho lions, are conclusive in determining tho 
era of tho Hates to bo that of tho fifteenth century. Possibly, 
somo of tho earliest of the existing Plates may have been copied 
from still earlier records of a similar class; and tho earliost 
Shields of arms may havo had their blazonry determined by the 
seals and other authoritative heraldic relics of the Personages 
to whom they belong; but this is doubtful, since more than 
one Garter-Plato of tho Plantagonet Princes boars France 
modern in tho first and fourth quarters, whereas it is certain 
that these Princes themselves in their lifetime" quartorod 
France ancient. The usage of encircling the Shield with tho 
Garter of the Order did not prevail until the reign of Henry 
VII. A most valuable collection of tracings from the Garter 
Plates by Leake is preserved in the College of Arms; and 
happily "Garter" is a vigilant observer of tho safe keeping 
of tho original Plates. 

Star:— an Ensign of Knightly Rank, common to the He- 
raldry of every civilized people. See Chap. XX. 

Star of India :— seo Chap. XX., Section 12. 

Sum and Roses seo Yorkist Collar. 

Super-Charge .-—one Device or Figure charged upon another. 

Supporter :— a Figure, whether of a human or of an imagi- 
nary being, or of any living creature of whatever kind, which 
stands on one side of a Shield, or sometimes behind it, as if in 
the act of holding the Shield up (supporting it), or guarding it. 
Supporters generally appear in pairs, one to the Dexter and tho 
other to the Sinister of the Shield ; in the greater number of 
examples they are both alike, but frequently they are altogether 
distinct from one anothor, as in tho instance of the Royal Sup- 



Digitized by Google 



MISCELLANEOUS NAMES AND TITLES. 



131 



porters of England, the Lion and the Unicorn. See Supporters, 
in Chap. XVII., Section 3. 

Surcoat : — a long, loose, and flowing garment of rich mate- 
rials, worn by the early Knights over their armour. It was 
sometimes charged with the armorial insignia of the Wearer, 
as in tho Brass at Chartham, in Kent, to Sir Robert De Setvans, 
abont a.d. 1305. Abont tho year 1325 the Surcoat began to 
bo superseded by a singular Garment entitled a Cycles, which, 
whilo long and flowing behind, was cut off short in the front. 
Tho Brass to Sir John D'Aubernoun tho younger, a.d. 1327, 
and tho sculptured Effigy of Prince John Plantagenet, of 
Eltham, a.d. 1337, afford admirable examples. About a.d. 1345 
tho Cyclas was shortened behind, and about 1355 it was super- 

- 

scded by the Jnpon. 

Tabard .—the Garment that was worn by the Knighte of tho 
Tudor Era. When the Jupon ceased to be worn, about a.d. 
1405, the splendid Panoply of Plate Armour was not covered 




No. C30.— Tabard of John Feld, Esq., a.d. 1477. 

by any Garment, until after 1450, when the Tabard was 
introduced. It was short, and had wide sleeves reaching to 

k 2 



Digitized by Google 



132 MISCELLANEOUS NAMES AND TITLES. 

tho elbows; and the arras of the wearer were displayed on 
both tho front and back of the Tabard itself, and of its sleeves. 
The Brasses to Sir John Say, a.d. 1473, at Broxbourno, Herts; 
to John Feld, Esq., a.d. 1477, at Standon, Herts; and to 
Peter Gerard, Esq., a.d. 1402, at Winwick, Lancashire, are 
good examples. No. 630 represents the Tabard of John Feld, 
with its armorial blazonry,—^., a fesse or, between three eagles 
displayed org., guttees du sang. One eagle only is visible above 
the fesso on tho sleeves. An excellent oxample of the military 
Tabard in its earliest and partially doveloped form appears in 
the sculptured effigy of JonN Fitz-Alan, Earl of Arundel, 
a.d. 1434, at Arundel. This Tabard has the sleeves adjusted 
more closely about the upper arms than was tho custom at a 
later period; it is charged with the quartered arms of Fitz- 
Alan and Maltravers. Tho Tabard remains in use as the Offi- 
cial Habit of Horalds. 

Templars . —see Chap. XX., Section 2. 

Thistle :— tho Badgo of Scotland : see Chapter XIX., Section 4. 

Timbre :— the Helm, when placed abovo tho Shield in an 
Achievement of Arms ; No. 301, PI. I., &amp;c. 

Tinctures :— tho Metals, Colours, and Furs of Heraldry. See 
Chap. IV. 

Truncheon :— the official Badge of the Earl Marshal of Eng- 
land, consisting of a golden Rod, tipped at each end with 
black enamel, and having tho Royal Arms blazoned on the 
upper, and the Earl Marshal's own arms on the lower end. It 
was granted, with the Patent of the Earl Marshal's Office, in the 
ninth of Richard II., to Thomas Mowbray, Earl of Nottingham. 
See No. 299, Chap. XXVH. 

Ulster, Badge of:— see Baronet : also, No. 177, PI. IX. 

Vert : — the Colour Green. 

Victoria Cross:— nee Chap. XX., Section 12. 

View .-—the trail, or trace of any Animal of the Chase. 

Visitations, Heralds' .-—periodical Circuits performed at inter- 



Digitized by Google 



MISCELLANEOUS NAMES AND MILES. 



133 



vals of about thirty years by the Heralds, under the authority 
of Royal Commissions, for tho purpose of inquiring into all 
matters connected with tho bearing of Arms, Genealogies, 
and similar subjects, for collecting information, and for drawing 
up authoritative Records. The earliest of these Visitations 
took place in tho year 1413, but they did not become general 
until after tho commencement of tho sixteenth century. The 
latest Commission of Visitation bears date May 13, 1086. 
On these occasions tho Heralds were attended by Registrars, 
Draftsmen, and other appropriate officers. The Records of 
theso Visitations are preserved in the College of Arms, and a 
large proportion of tho hereditary Arms of the Realm is borne 
on their authority. 

Viscount : — tho fourth Degree and Title in tho Order of Rauk 
in the British Peerage, intervening between the Earl and tho 
Baron. In Latin, Vice Comes. This dignity was first granted 
by Henry VT m a.d. 1440, to John, Baron Beaumont, K.G. A 
Viscount is Bight Honourable, and is styled " My Lord." His 
Sons and Daughters aro Honourable. The Coronet, first granted 




No. 317. 



by James L, enclosing a Cap like those of tho other Orders of 
Nobility, 'has a row of fourteen Pearls (smaller than thoso of 
the Baron's Coronet) sot upon a Circle of Gold, tho Pearls 
being in Contact. In representations nine of those Pearls aro 
shown; No. 317. Tho Parliamentary Robe of a Viscount is 
scarlot, and it has two and a half Doublings of Ermine. Tho 
wife of a Viscount is styled a Viscountess. Seo Coronet. 

Wreath or Orle : — a Circlet entwined about a Helm to sup- 
port tho Crest, and which is still represented as discharging 



Digitized by Google 



134 



MISCELLANEOUS NAMES AND TITLES. 



that offioo beneath tho greater number of the Croats of Modern 



of Silk or other rich material, one of them of tho principal 
Metal, and the other of tho principal Colour in the Arms, which 
were twisted in such a manner as to show the Metal and tho 
Colour in alternation, the Metal having tho precedence in re- 
presentations; Nos. 318, and 318 a, PL XV. Many of the 
Mediaeval Helm-Wreaths were splendidly enrichod ; and nu- 
merous fine examples exist in sculptured and engraven monu- 
mental effigies: Nos. 257, 238, PI. XVI., represent tho close- 
fitting and tho projecting types of Crest-Wreath, from tho Effi- 
gies of Sir HuGn Calveley, and of Ralph Neville, Earl of 
Westmoreland. Tho Crest- Wreath of Sir John Harsyck, a.d. 
1374, in his Brass at Southacro No. 301, PI. I., is one of the 
earliest known examples; but the Crest of Sir Hugh Hastings, 
in his Brass at Elsyng, also in Norfolk, a.d. 1347— it is a bull's 
head couped — also rests upon a Crest- Wreath, which is carried by 
a holm with its mantling. Soo Crest in Chap. XVII., Soction 2. 

Yorkist Badge and Collar: — formed of Suns and Roses. See 
Chap. XX., Section 6. 



No. 408. Achievement of Arms of John Pauryqn£, a.d. 1345, from hi* 
monumental slab at Norton BrUo, Oxfordalure, See p. 46 and Chap. XV. 





Digitized by Google 



No. 335 a. Quartered Shield of Arms-borno upon ouo of her seals by 
Isabella, Quoon of Edward II. 800 also No. 335 c, Tl. LXXX. 



CHAPTER XIV. 

MARSHALLING AND INHERITANCE. 

The Association of certain Heraldic Insignia, or " Anns," 
with tho Possessors of certain Dignities or Properties, and the 
Transmission of the Heraldry with the Rank and Estates by 
Hereditary Descent, would often render it necessary for the 
same Individual to boar more than one Armorial Ensign, since 
instances might occur in which soveral Dignities with their 
appanages might become concentrated in a single person. So 
also with Families and Estates, it might happen that a single 
Individual would in some instances become tho solo Representa- 
tive of several Houses, and tho Possessor of Accumulated 
Properties. Again : Alliances might be formed between persons 
either entitled to boar the same Arms, or distinguished by 
different Heraldic Insignia, which Alliances Heraldry might 
both significantly declare and faithfully record. Hence arose 
the System which Heralds call Marshalling. 

This Marshalling, accordingly, is the practical application of 



Digitized by Google 



136 



MARSHALLING AND INHERITANCE. 



tho Principles which guide Heralds in their own treatment of 
Heraldry, when they would employ it to chronicle History, and 
to record Biography. 

With the right to possess and to bear Heraldic Insignia is 
directly associated tho privilege to transmit and to inherit them. 
For while, in the first instance, strictly personal in their charac- 
ter, Arms, at a very early period in the History of Heraldry, 
wore regarded and treated as hereditary possessions. Hence it 
becomes necessary that the Marsh allino and the Inheritance 
of Arms should be considered togothor. 

In the days of tho early Heralds thero existed a Court of 
Chivalry, which took cognizance of matters connected with the 
Inheritance and the "Right and Title to boar and to transmit 
Arms ; but at the present day it would be difficult to appeal on 
any such points to higher or more definite authorities, than the 
usage of Heraldry and that prescriptive right to which the 
power of Law is frequently conceded. 

Horaldio Insignia or «* Arms" are unquestionably «• property 
and tho lawful holder of Arms has in them a true ostato in fee. 
This possession, however, is now subject to theso two remark- 
able and important conditions: first, the lawful possessor of 
Arms does not possess any right or power to alienate them ; and, 
secondly, the inheritance of Arms is restricted to Heirs who are 
lineally descended from the first lawful possessor of those Arms. 
In the 14th and 15th centuries, indeed, deeds of questionable 
validity were frequently executed for alienating what may be 
entitled heraldic property ; and in the 1 4th century Arms were 
occasionally granted, without any restriction, to Heirs general : 
still, in our own times the general Rule obtains, on the one hand, 
that Arms cannot be alienated, and, on tho other hand, that 
Arms can bo inherited only by lineal descendants. Sound He- 
raldry certainly determines both that the true title to Arms is 
Inheritance, and that the truo Inheritance of Arms descends 
with the direct lineage. 



Digitized by Google 



MARSHALLING AND INHERITANCE. 187 

It is also a general Rule of Heraldry that the right to hold and 
use the Arms of a Family appertains to the existing Head of such 
Family, and is possessed by him with his personal position, and 
with the family dignities and property that are vested in him. 

In tracing descent, malo issue always has the preference ; and 
where there exist several male descendants equal in the dcgreo 
of their hereditary relationship, the eldest always has the pre- 
ference. Should a male Heir of direct lineage fail, a female suc- 
ceeds ; and if there be several female descendants equal in degree 
they all inherit equally. 

The Heir, whilo he yet continues to bo heir, bears the Arms 
of his Father (or other lineal progenitor), with the addition of 
that Difference which the usage of Cadency assigns to the Heir 
as his own proper distinctive mark. All the Sons also now bear 
their Father's Arms, in each case the appropriate mark of Ca- 
dency being added. It will be understood that neither the Heir 
nor the Cadets of any House bear tho impaled Arms of their 
Father and Mothor ; but, on the contrary, should their Father 
bear their Mother's Arms on an Escutchoon of Pretence, then 
they all bear their Father's Arms charged with their Mother's 
Escutcheon of Fretence, their several Differences being charged 
upon their Father's Shield and not upon the Inescutcheon. 

When the Heir succeeds, he inherits the Arms of his Father 
without any Difference, and without the Arms of his Mother ; 
but if his Mother had been an Heiress, he quarters her Arms 
with the Arms of his Father ; that is, he inherits the Arms of 
both his Father and his Mothor, and thus becomes the possessor 
of a quartered Shield, with tho power and privilege to transmit 
it to his descendants. 

Daughters all bear on lozenges the same Arms as their oldest 
brother bears (or tho same as their eldest Brother would bear, 
had they any such Brother), both during the lifetime of their 
Father and after his decease, but without any mark of Cadency 
whatever. 



Digitized by Google 



138 



MARSHALLING AND INHERITANCE. 



Marshalling, as distinguished from Blazoning, may bo dofincd 
to signify — I. The Arrangement and Disposition of more than 
one distinct Ileraldio Composition, ox, Coat of Arms, upon a 
single Shield : — or, 

II. The Disposition and Aggroupmont of two or more dis- 
tinct Shields of Arms, so that thoy shall form and constitute a 
singlo Ileraldio Composition :— and 

III. The Association of certain Accessorial Devices and In- 
signia with the Shield of Arms, with the view to render any 
Ileraldio Composition absolutely complete in every consistent 
and appropriate Detail. It will be desirable to consider Mar- 
shalling under each of these three applications of its Principles 
and System of Action. 

I. The Arrangement and Disposition op two or more 
distinct Coats of Arms upon a Single Shield, would na- 
turally admit of two primary distinctions, the one having re- 
ference to such combinations as would constitute a permanent 
Heraldic Chronicle, to be transmitted upon precisely the samo 
principle as an Heir would inherit the Arms with the Estate 
of his Father; and the other having regard only to a tempo- 
rary Alliance, which would extend to and be terminated with 
the life of the Person who would bear the United Arms. 
Heraldry is very careful in thus discriminating between a Com- 
bination which is, and another which is not, to become heredi- 
tary. 

The non-hereditary Combination which is habitually mar- 
shalled by Heralds, is that produced by the Union of the Arms 
of a Husband with those of his Wife, in all cases in which the 
wife does not possoss in her own person hereditary rank, or is 
not the Heiress, or Representative, (or Co-Heiress, or Co- 
liepresentativo) of any Family. It is obvious that if in every 
instance the Arms of a Mother were borne by her sons, with 
their Father's Arms, and the two thus united were to. be con- 
tinually transmitted, there would speedily arise so great a 



Digitized by Google 



MARSUALL1N0 AND INHERITANCE 



130 



complication of Armorial Insignia as would inovitably render 
Heraldry itself either an impossibility, or a mere arbitrary and 
unmeaning method of Ornamentation. Undor all ordinary 
circumstances, therefore, in such marriages as those that have 
boon spocified, the Arms of the Husband and the Wifo are borne 
together (in tho manner immediately to bo described) by the 
Husband and tho Wife, and by the Survivor of them ; but, tho 
Arms of the Wife aro not hereditary, and aro not borne by any, 
either of her own Children, or of their Descendants. Tho only 
admissible Deviation from this Law would apply to the con- 
tingency of some very unusual alliance, (as between a private 
gentleman and a Princess, tho Princess being absolutely dower- 
less,) when the Lady's remarkable personal Rank or Position 
might justify a departure from horaldio Rule — a doparturo that 
would exactly fulfil tho conditions of such an exception as would 
corroborate the Rule itself. 

The Arms of a Husband and Wife are marshalled in a singlo 
Shield by an heraldic process, entitled Impalement. It is 
effected by dividing tho Shield by a vertical line through its 
Fesso-point, into two equal parts, (as in No. 9, Chap. III.), and 
then placing one complete Coat of Arms in each half of tho 
Shield. The Arms of a Husband and Wife are thus impaled, the 
Arms of tho Husband always occupying tho Dexter, and those 
of the Wife the Sinister half of the Shield. In thus impaling 
two Coats of Arms, the arrangement of the Charges and their 
proportions are in every instance to be adapted to tho altered 
space afforded by the impaled Shield. In descriptive blazoning, 
each Coat of Arms so far retains its own distinctive indivi- 
duality, that the second description is treated as altogether 
distinct from the first, though the two descriptions aro grouped 
together. I assume, for the sake of illustration, that a 
Stafford marries a Butler ; then their impaled Shield, No. 319, 
is blazoned, or, a Chevron gules, for Stafford, No. 319 a ; im- 
paling, or, a Chief indented azure, for Butler, No. 319 b: seo 



Digitized by Google 



140 



MARSHALLING A N L&gt; INHERITANCE. 



ri. XXIV. This Impaled Shield sets forth tliat the Stafford 
who married a Butler had impaled his wife's Arms (which sho 
bore as her Father's Daughter, and not as his Heiress or Co- 
Ileiress) with his own Arms of Stafford. But should the lady 
be an Heiress or Co-Heiress of the House of Butler, instead of Im- 
palement, another process would be adopted. The Arms of the 
Heiress (in accordance with a comparatively recent usage) are 
placed upon a small Shield in Pretence upon the Shield of Stafford. 
And this would bo dono by each Co-Heiress on her marriage, 
should there bo Co-Heiresses. Such is the usago which now 
obtains. It must be observed, however, that a Husband then 
only has a true heraldic right to bear in Pretence the Arms of 
the Heiress his Wife when he has by her Issue, who, after his 
decease, may quarter her Arms with his own. This Marshalling 
in Pretence is shown in No. 354, PI. XXIV. The Impaled 
Shield, No. 319, is not hereditary, and the Butler Arms would 
not bo transmitted to the Issuo of the marriage. But the Arms 
of the Heiress are hereditary, and would be transmitted. They 
are to be permanently associated with the Arms of Stafford, and 
tho two together are to become the Quartered Arms of the suc- 
ceeding Descendants and lineal Heirs and Representatives of tho 
united Houses of Stafford and Butler. Thus, if the Butler Lady 
were not an Heiress, her Children and Representatives would 
bear simply their Father's Arms of Stafford, as No. 319 A; but 
tho Children and Descendants of the Butler Lady who teas an 
Heiress would quarter Butler tcith Stafford, as in No. 355, which 
has in the 1st and 4th Quarters Stafford, and Butler in tho 2nd 
and 3rd Quarters. The Blazon would be, Quarterly, 1st and 4th, 
Stafford ; 2nd and 3rd, Butler. 

Thus, a permanent and hereditary combination of two Coats 
of Arms has arisen, produced through the circumstance that 
the Son of an Heiress is Heir to his Mother as well as to his 
Father ; and this conjoint Inheritance Heraldry sets forth, re- 
cords, and hands down to succeeding generations through its 



Digitized by Google 



MARS H. Uf If IX f y 




Digitized by Google 



Digitized by Google 



MARSHALLING AND INHERITANCE. 



141 



happily appropriate and consistent system of Marshalling by 
Quartering. 

In Quartering Anns in our own times wo have to keep in re- 
membrance that the first Quarter is always to be charged with 
the Arms that are the most important in the group ; and also 
that the other Coats take precedence in the quartered compo- 
sition in their order of chronological association, that is, as they 
severally were added to tho group and incorporated with it — as 
modern Heralds say, as they were " brought in." With a view 
to illustrate Marshalling as it is now practised, I proceed to 
exemplify the varied treatment of two Coats of Arms under dif- 
ferent conditions of this process. I shall employ throughout tho 
Shields of Stafford and Butler, Nos. 319 a and 319 b, which I 
have already shown combined by simple Impalement in No. 
319, PL XXIV., and which also appear in No. 3M in the same 
Plate with tho Arms of the Butler Heiress marshalled in Pre- 
tence upon tho Shield of her ITusband ; and again, in No. 355, 
these two Shields appear quartered, as they would be borne by 
tho Descendants of tho Butler Heiress and her Husband. 

Now, assuming that another Stafford, a Son, or lineal De- 
scendant of this Butler Heiress, and himself, thereforo, bearing 
M Stafford and Butler quarterly" No. 355, should marry a Camp- 
bell, thon, as before, if tho Lady be not an Heiress, he simply 
Impales Campbell, No. 356, gyronny or and sable, with his own 
quartered Arms, as in No. 357 ; or, if tho Lady be an Heiress, 
upon his own quartered Shield ho places Campbell in Pretence, 
as in No. 358. From thenceforward tho hereditary Shield in- 
cludes Campbell in its Quartcrings, and it assumes the aspect of 
No. 359. And so, in precisely the same manner, other Quarter- 
ings might be introduced during the lapse of time ; or the Shield, 
No. 359, with its three Quarterings, might long remain un- 
changed. 

There yet remains one contingency that requires attention. 
In the case of a Daughter of the Campbell Heiress, any such 



Digitized by Google 



142 MARSHALLING AND INHERITANCE 

Lady would boar the Arms of Stafford, Butler, and Campbell 
quarterly, No. 359, on a Lozengo, and not on a Shield. Were 
she to marry, if she herself were not to be an Heiress, her Hus- 
band wonld simply impale with his own Arms her quartered 
Arms ; and their Children would bear their Father's Arms only. 
But if she, like hor Mother, wore to be an Heiress, then, as 
boforo, her Husband would charge hor quartered Arms upon a 
separate Shield in Pretence upon his own; and their Children 
and Descendants would quarter the quartered Shield of the Heiress. 
This must bo exemplified. 

Suppose tho Daughter of tho Campbell Heiress (who would 
bear No. 359) to marry a Bentinck, who boars, — Az., a Cross 
moline arg. t No. 360 : if sho is not an Heiress, her quartered 
Shield is impaled by her Husband, as in No. 362 ; but if an 
Heiress, her Quartered Shield is set in Pretence upon the Ben- 
tinck Arms, as in No. 363. In order to transmit these Arms by 
means of Quartering, a new modification of that process will be 
nocessary, since now a quartered Shield has to bo quartered. The 
Marshalling now proceeds by Quarterly Quartering. Here, as in 
No. 16, p. 17, tho primary Quarters are Grand Quarters, any or 
all of which may bo quartered. We require a Shield quarterly 
quartered in tho 2nd and 3rd Quarters, as No. 364. In this 
Shield, Grand Quarters 1 and 4 bear Bentinck ; and Grand Quar- 
ters 2 and 3 are each charged with Stafford, Butler, and Camp- 
bell. This Shield becomes hereditary, and admits of further 
quarterings, should occasions arise, upon tho same system. If a 
Son of tho Campbell Heiress, who had married a Stafford- 
Butler, wero to marry a Bentinck, he would simply impale her 
Arms, or if she wero an Hoiross, would chargo them in Pretence 
upon his quartered Shield, No. 359 ; and in this last case, his Chil- 
dren would quarter Bentinck in the 4th Quarter, as in No. 361. 

Should a man bearing a quartered Shield marry an Heiress, 
ho would place her Arms in Pretence upon his own quartered 
Shield. Should her Arms be quartered, then tho hereditary 



Digitized by Google 



MARSHALLING AND INHERITANCE. 



143 



Shield would bo quarterly quartered, and each of the Grand 
Quarters would bo quartered ; and the quartered Arms of tho 
Father would bo in tho 1st and 4th Grand Quarters, and tho 
quartered Arms of tho Mother in tho 2nd and 3rd Grand Quar- 
ters. If any student will work out such a system of Marshalling, 
ho will speedily become familiar with the entire rango of quar- 
tering, while at the same tirao ho will be impressed with tho 
versatility and tho precision of Heraldic Chronicles. Tho Peer- 
age, with such old authorities as may bo available, will furnish 
an ample variety of examples for study and practice. 

When younger Sons bear the Quartered Shield of their Father 
and the Heiress their Mother, they place their mark of Cadency 
so that it may cover all their quartorings. 

In tho caso of a Gentleman marrying an Ileiress, and having a 
Daughter by her but no Son, and afterwards having a Son by 
another marriage, the Daughter is tho Heir of the Ileiress her 
own Mother, but she never becomes Heir of her Father. Such 
a Daughter, therefore, inherits the Anns of her Mother, while 
her Brother of the half-blood inherits the Arms of their Father. 
In order to save a Lady thus circumstanced from losing all 
horaldio memorial of her Father, tho usage of Heraldry authorises 
her to have recourso to MarsJtalling by Incorporation, and either to 
charge tho Arms of her Father upon a Canton, this Canton to be 
added to her Maternal Arms, or to place her Father's Arms in 
tho chief of tho Lozongo upon which she bears tho Arms of her 
Mother. Tho Arms thus augmented by Incorporation are trans- 
mitted to the Descendants of the Lady, who, in this mannor, 
would show that she was the Heir of her Mother but not of her 
Fathor. 

Augmentations of Honour, which in the first instance are charged 
upon small Shields of rrotenco, are never quartered, but always 
retain their original position as integral components of their own 
Shields, whether those Shields themselves be or bo not quartered. 
Seo Chap. XXVIII. 



Digitized by Google 



144 



MARSHALLING ANI&gt; INHERITANCE. 



When any Coat of Arms that bears a Bordure or a Tressurc is 
marshalled quarterly with other Coats, then no part of the Bor- 
dure or Trossuro is to bo oraittod in the quartcrod Coat ; that is, 
Quartering does not affect a Bordure or Tressure. Thns, in tho 
Royal Arms, No. .'M4, the Treasure of Scotland is blazoned com- 
plete in the second quarter ; and in No. 3G4 a, PI. XXIII., from 
the Brass to Lady Tiptoft, at Enfield, a.d. 1440, Potcys quarters 
Holland, Holland retaining in both quarters the Silver Bordure 
complete. 

Marks of Cadency remain unaffected by quartering ; and if they 
have been assumed, and are retained, they may bo transmitted 
and may become hereditary. Thus, the Label of the Courtenays 
has long ceased to bo a Difference, and has become an integral 
component of tho Courtonay Arms ; but, in tho Roll of Henry III., 
the representative of this Family bears, or, three torteaux y without 
any label. 

Archbishops and Bishops impale their paternal Arms with the 
Arms of their Sees, placing the latter on tho dextor side of their 
Shields. Those and all other Official Arms are not hereditary. 

The Arms of tho Herald Kings aro marshalled after the same 
manner; that is, thoy place their Official Arms on tho dexter 
side of their Shields, impaling their hereditary insignia. 

Tftc Daughter of a Peer bears her Father's Arms, but without 
any Coronet or Supporters ; and her Husband impales her Arms, 
which do not become horeditary. 

Should a Widower marry again, he sometimes impales the Anns 
of both his wives, the two being placed in the Sinister half of 
the Shield, those of the first wife in Chief, and those of the second 
in Base, or both Coats marshalled per pale. But if the former wife 
should have been an Heiress, her Arms would appear in Pre- 
tence upon those of her husband on the dexter side, and the Arms 
of the second wife would be impaled in tho ordinary manner ; 
and, contrariwise, if the second wife be an Heiress, her Arms 
would be charged in Pretence upon the Shiold still impaled as at 



Digitized by Google 



MARSHALLING AND INHERITANCE. 



145 



first. In case both the ladies should be Heiresses, then their 
respective Arms might be marshalled per fesse upon a single 
Escutcheon of Fretence, precedence being given to the first 
wife ; or, the second Shield of Pretence might be charged upon 
the first, as in No. 720, PI. LIU. The Inheritance of these 
Arms is clear and decided ; but the hereditary quarterings in 
every such instance would have to be determined in accordance 
with the special circumstances of each particular case, but. always 
in strict adherence to heraldic principle and heraldic rule. 

An unmarried Lady bears her paternal Coat of Arms, whether 
single or quartered, upon a Lozenge, without any Crest. See 
No. 104. This most inconvenient Lozenge was in use at an 
early period : thus, an example of impaled Arms, blazoned upon 
a Lozenge and borne by a Queen in her husband's lifetime, is 
shown in No. 719, PI. LH. ; the Arms are those of Margaret, 
Queen of James III. of Scotland, about a.d. 1480. 

A Widow, not an Heiress, retains the impaled Arms as borne 
by her late husband and herself ; or, if an Heiress, a Widow 
retains her husband's Arms charged with hor own in Pretence ; 
but, in either case, the Arms of a Widow are borne upon a 
Lozenge, and without a Crest. Should a Widow marry a second 
time, unless her former husband was a Peer, she ceases to bear 
his Arms. The Marshalling of the Arms of the Widow of a 
Peer who may marry again is given in the next Section of this 
Chapter. 

The Arms of Corporate Bodies, and also of Institutions and Asso- 
ciations, Of whatsoever kind, may be marshalled by means of 
regular quartering, the several Coats of Arms being arranged 
and assigned to their proper quarters in the Compound Com- 
position in the order of their relative precedence. 

Marshalling by Incorporation, that is, instead of quartering, 
actually constructing a single Coat of Arms from the component 
elements of two or more distinct heraldic compositions, is gene- 
rally repudiated by modern Heralds as inconsistent with that 

L 



Digitized by Google 



146 



MARSHALLING AND INHERITANCE. 



distinct and expressive definition which Heraldry impresses on 
its productions. Still, a foremost place in the very front rank 
of English Heraldry must bo assigned to the Union Jack, which, 
as I have shown, is an example of such Marshalling by Incor- 
poration : see Nos. 63 and 64, p. 26, and also Chap. XVIIT. As 
I have just shown also (p. 143), in modern practice a paternal 
Coat is marshalled by Incorporation upon the Arms of a daughter 
who is Heir to her mother but not to her father, and thus is 
transmitted to that daughter's children and descendants. 

When first introduced, Impalement was effected in a manner 
which, however natural in the first instance, would necessarily 
bo speedily abandoned, since it would bo found in many in- 
stances to affect and evon to destroy the distinctive character 
of tho Charges, and therefore to overthrow heraldic accuracy 
and truthfulness. The primitive method of Impalement con- 
sisted in actually cutting into halves, by a vertical section, 
each Coat of Arms, and taking the Dexter half of the Husband's 
Arms, and the Sinister half of the Wife's Arms, and placing 
these two halves side by sido in contact, to form a single com- 
bined armorial composition. This was styled Impaling by 
Dimidiation or Dimidiating; and it appears to have been intro- 
duced into English Heraldry during tho Reign of Edward I., 
a.d. 1272-1307. I illustrate this process by another historical 
example. No. 194, Plate V., is tho Shield of Edmond Plan- 
taoenet, Earl of Cornwall, (son of Richard Plantagenet, 
himself tho Second Son of King John,); and No. 40 a, p. 21. 
is that of his wife, Margaret, daughter of Earl Richard dk 
Clare. This Edmond died a.d. 1300, and his Seal is charged 
with the dimidiated Arms of Cornwall and Clare, No. 320, 
Plate XVI II., of which the blazon is,— arg. f a Lion rampt. gu., 
crowned or, within a Bordure sable bezanlee, for Cornwall, 
(the Lion for Foictou, and tho Bordure for Cornwall); im- 
paling by Dimidiation— or, three CJievronels gu., for De Clare. 
It will be observed in No. 320, that each of the Shields, Nos. 



Digitized by Google 



MARSH Alflj'IXG. 



CHAPTER r/ 





put* zxm 



Digitized by Google 



MARSHALLING AND INHERITANCE. 



147 



194 and 40 a, is cut in halves per pale, and that the Dexter half 
of No. 194, and the Sinister half of No. 40 a constitute No. 320. 
The evil effects of Dimidiation are exemplified in a striking 
manner in this dimidiated Shield, in which tho three half 
Chevronels become as many Bendlets, and, consequently, the asso- 
ciation with tho historical Shield of tho De Clares is altogether 
lost. Had Nos. 319 a, and 319 b, Tl. XXIV., been dimidiated, 
tho Stafford chevron could no longer have been recognized. 
In No. 321, PL XVII., I have shown the Coat of Arms of 
Cornwall and De Clare united by simple impalement. Hero 
the arms of De Clare appear complete, though there is neces- 
sarily some modification of tho proportion of the chevrons; 
while in the Arms of Cornwall the bordure alono is affected 
by the impalement. The Seal of the " Provostry of tho town of 
Youghal," in Ireland (see Herald and Genealogist, i. 485), about 
a.d. 1274, displays a Shield charged with the dimidiated Arms 
of Clajie and FitzGerald : here tho De+cier semi-chevrons aro shown 
in combination with the Sinister semi-saltirc of the Irish Coat, 
which in this instance is differenced with a label of three points. 
Another Seal of tho same period, for tho " Burgesses of Youghal," 
has the same two Shields side by side, FitzGerald — org., a saltire 
gu. — being to tho Dexter differenced with a label of fivo points, 
while a label of three points differences tho Shield of Clare. 
The Arms are those of Sir Thomas de Clare, younger son of 
Kicilard, Earl of Hertford, and his wife Juliana FitzGerald of 
Youghal ; No. 320 a, PL. LXXX. 

Upon one of her seals, Margaret of France, the second Queen 
of Edward I., bears England dimidiating France ancient, 
No. 322, PL XVIII. The dimidiation in this instance does not 
very materially affect the arms of England, but the flours do lys 
aro bisected. Two lions rampant aro introduced upon this seal, 
on either side of the Shield, respecting it. See Chap. XXIV., 
Sect. 1, I may hero refer to a notice in tho Archaeological 
Journal (for tho year 1K50, p. 134), of a small silver casket in the 

l 2 



Digitized by Google 



148 



MARSHALLING AND INHERITANCE. 



Goodrich Court Collections, which has on each sloping face of 
its lid three quatre-foil panels, containing either England dimi- 
diating Franc*, or the same dimidiated coat differenced with a label 
of three points : possibly this casket may have been the property 
of Queen Margaret, or of her eldest son. Isabelle, the 
Queen of Edward II., upon one of her seals also dimidiates 
England and France ancient; and another of her seals is 
charged with her effigy standing botween two Shields, one of 
them bearing England, and the other France ancient, dimi- 
diating Navarre; No. 323, PI. XVIII.: theso shields are 
severally those of her husband and of her father and mother. 
Another characteristic example of the effect of dimidiation 
upon the flour do lys appears in the Shield, No. 324, PI. XVIII., 
that is carved upon the curious chess-knight, (about a.d. 1 285), 
in tho possession of the Society of Antiquaries of Scotland. 
One of the Shields upon tho monument to Earl William de 
Valence in Westminster Abbey, a.d. 1296, boars De Valence 
dimidiating Claremonte Nesle (a French coat), gu. y seme'e of 
trefoils, two barbels hnuricnt, addorsed, or; No. 325, PI. XVIII. 
In Miscellanea Curiosa (Coll. Arm. LXIV.), the Arms of both 
Claremonte and De Barr are blazoned with dolphins em- 
botced, but the fish are certainly barbels. Other examples of 
dimidiation may yet be distinguished in the Heraldry of the noblo 
monument to Earl Aymer de Valence, a.d. 1323, also at West- 
minster. Another good example of this usage appears on the seal 
of Eleanor, widow of Guy Ferre, a.d. 1348, which bears on a shield 
tho Arms of Ferre, dimidiating those of Montendre ; No. 325 A, 
PI. LXXX. A Roll of Arms of E. II. gives for "Sire Guy de 
Ferre," " de goules a un fer de molin de argent, e tin bastoun de azure ;" 
Montendre is — gu., a lion rampt. within an orle of trefoils slipped or. 

From the early dimidiation of two distinct coats of arms, the 
compound devices that occasionally appear in more recent 
armorial bearings may be considered to have derived their 
origin. Thus, the arms of the Borough of Great Yarmouth 



Digitized by Google 



MAKSIIAI/1/IXG and CADENCY 



CHAr IE Hi 3 XIV, *XY 



CHESTER 



cinque ports 



1 




SIR ALEXAXDKR G1FFARI) 





CLARE: FITZCKRAI.D. 



AMANOHK FKRRF. 




P 9 V 




Plate 



MARSHALLING AND INHERITANCE. 



ranm 



149 



have resulted from the shield of England having dimidiated 
another shield, azure, charged with three herrings naiant in pale 
org., finned or: a shield, No. 326, PI; XV1IL, charged with 
these dimidiated arms, and to be referred to about the year 1390, 
occurs upon one of the bosses of the roof of the south aisle of 
the church of Great Yarmouth. In like manner, the arms of 
IrswicH in Suffolk are compounded of England dimidiating an 
azure shield, charged with the hulls of three ships in pale. In 
the church of St. Mary Quay, Ipswich, are two Brasses to bur- 
gesses of that town, severally a.d. 1525 and 1551 ; upon the 
former, to Thomas Pownder, the Shield of the borough is 
blazoned with a single half-lion and a single half-ship, the lion 
facing to the sinister ; but Henry Toolye, on his Brass, marshals 
a single lion rampant and three half-ships. The seals of the 
Cinque Ports bear Shields charged with the same Arms — England 
dimidiating three ship's hulls in pale. See Chap. XX IV. , Sect. 1 . An 
excellent example of a Cinque Port Shield, with the Arms in 
relief, is preserved in the cloisters at Canterbury : it is the third 
from the eastern end of the south walk. At Fordwich, near 
Canterbury, the compound device, half-lion and half-ship, of the 
Cinque Ports, forms the vane of the church. Again, the Anns 
of the City of Chester are, England, dimidiating az. t three garbes 
or; No. 326 a., PL LXXX. See Chap. XXXII. 

Mr. Planch £ is of opinion that " to this practice of dimidia- 
tion wo owe the double-headed eagle of the German Empire." 
This must imply that one of the dimidiated eagles should 
originally have faced to the sinister. Mr. Planche adds 
" that several instances of dimidiation occur in the arms of 
German Cities and Counts of Flanders, which will illustrate hia 
theory for the origin of the German double-headed eagle, by 
showing the effect of the eagle dimidiated by other animals or 
heraldic figures :" and he gives a curious example of the in- 
corporation of a semi-eagle and a semi-lion, the evident result 
of dimidiation, the lion facing to the sinister, from the seal of 



Digitized by Google 



150 



MARSHALLING AND INHERITANCE. 



Alice D'Avesnes, No. 327, PL XVIII. I may place side by 
side with Mr. Plancho's example, the seal of Teter Tederade, 
" canonici crelensis " (a personago of whom I am unable to give 
any particulars, but whose seal is in existence,) in which the 
eagle faces to the sinister, and the effect of the dimidiation is 
peculiarly striking ; No. 828. The Griffin of English Heraldry 
might reasonably bo regarded as a further development of a 
similar dimidiation, unless it is held to be a veritable member 
of that family of mediaeval Griffins whose ancestry flourished in 
tho remote ages of Assyrian greatness. See Chap. XXXII. 

Tho beautiful and elaborate seals that were held in such es- 
teem in the Middlo Ages, were frequently charged with heraldic 
insignia in association with rich architectural details. See Chap. 
XXIV., Section 1. In many examples, the early seals of per- 
sonages of eminence display several shields of arms placed in the 
different compartments of a composition of an architectural 
character ; and thus these Shields are grouped togother so as to 
form a single compound heraldic composition. Thus, tho seal 
of Joan, wifo of John de Warrenne, Earl of Surrey, though 
not more than one and a half inches in diameter, is charged 
with nine distinct heraldic bearings, each of which is so placed 
that it takes a becoming part in the architectural composition. 
In No. 329 I give a diagram of the arrangement of this seal, in 




No. 329. 

the principal parts of which the aims are charged upon lozenges. 
In the centre is 1. Warrenne; 2, 2. are England; 3, 3. are Dc 



Digitized by Google 



I 



Digitized by Google , 



MAR S H Alfl/IKG AXD CADENCY. 
stuedds OF ARMS of the pe bohuns. 



DE BOHI'.Nor HKHKPOKD DE BOHl'X ok NORTHAMPTON 




Plate XX 



Digitized by Google 



MARSHALLING AND INHERITANCE. 



151 



Barr, (No. 329 a, PL XIX., az., crusiUee, two barbels haurient ad- 
dorsad or, within a bordure engrailed gu.) ; and in the fonr quatre- 
foila are Leon and Castile alternately. The lady was the daughter 
of Henry, Count De Barr (in Franco), and Alianore, eldest 
daughter of Edward I., and Auanore of Castile and Leon. The 
Seal of Robert de Saint Qutntin, a.d. 1301, is another good 
example of such an aggroupment of soveral Shiolds. It is shown 
in the accompanying diagram, No. 329 b : 1. is an early shield of 
Saint Quintin, chequee org. and vert, on a /esse gu., three martlets 
or ; 2, 2, 2, 2. is Hastings, or, a manche gu. ; and 3, 3, 3, 3. is 
Fitz- Walter, or, a fesse between two chevrons gu. ; (Vincent MS. 
SS. in Coll. Arm.). See No. 705 in Chap. XXIV., Sect. 1 ; also 
the seal of Eliz. de Burg, in Norfolk Archcsol., v. 301. This 
system of grouping together several Shields of arms in an archi- 
tectural composition, would naturally lead to the grouping together 
several coats of arms in an heraldic composition. Tho Shields were 
all borne by the same person, and so their several bearings 
might obviously be concentrated upon a single shield. In other 
words, a single Shield charged with any required series of coats 
of arms duly arranged would naturally bo substituted, as a more 
compact and expressivo arrangement, for a group of separato 
though associated Shields. The quartered blazonry also might 
be actually displayed about his person, or on his Shield, by any 
noblo or knight. 

Tho counterseal of Humphrey de Bohun, fourth Earl of Here- 
ford and third Earl of Essex, a.d. 1327, affords an excellent 
illustration of that aggroupment of Shields, of which the full 
development was quartering. This seal, No. 201, PI. XX., bears 
a largo central Shield for tho Hereford Earldom between two 
smaller ones, No. 330, both of them (quarterly, or and gules) for 
tho Earldom of Essex. Tho same aggroupment of Shields ap- 
pears upon the counterseal of John de Bohun, tho fifth Earl of 
Hereford. Two or moro Shields of arms are frequently found 
upon early seals of Itoyal and Noble Ladies, with their effigies : 



Digitized by Google 



152 



MARSHALLING AND INHERITANCE. 



thus, Margaret, second Queen of E. I., is represented upon one 
of her seals having the three lions of England charged upon her tunic, 
and having on her right side a shield of France ancient, and on 
her left side a shield charged with a lion rampant. In like manner 
the effigy of Isabella, Queen of E. II., is represented upon her 
seal standing between a shield of England and another of France 
ancient dimidiating Navarre. On her seal Melicent de Montault 
(a.d. 1235) has her own effigy between two Shields, the one 
bearing a lion rampt., and the other three fleursde-lys (Vincent, 
MS. SS. in Coll. Arm.) Again, the seal of Margaret, wife 
of John de Neville, and afterwards of Sir J. Giffard (about 
a.d. 1300), displays her effigy between two Shields, the one to 
the dexter bearing Giffard (gu., three lions pass, in pale argr.), and 
the other being charged with a lion rampt. ; upon the tunic of the 
effigy the three lions are repeated. Many other early examples 
might be adduced of this practice of forming groups of Shields of 
arms before true quartering was regularly recognized ; nor was 
this usage altogether superseded by quartering until after the close 
of the fourteenth century. Accordingly, the secretum of Thomas 
Plantagenet, youngest son of Edward III., in its three princi- 
pal compartments has his own anus, Diagram No. 331, 2. ; those 
of his Duchess, Allanore de Bohun, 3. ; his helm and crest 1. ; 
the Swan badge, 4.; and the legend, 5. In like manner, the 



seal of Thoma8 Mowbray, Duke of Norfolk, who died in ban- 
ishment at Venice, a.d. 1400, bears three Shields, of which the 




No. 329 a. 



No. 331. 



Digitized by Google 



MARSHALLING AND INHERITANCE. 



153 



central Shield, No. 632, PL LXV., is charged with the arms of 
the Confessor, (a special grant from Richard II.,) impaling 
Brotherton, (England, with a silver label of Jive points) ; the 
dexter Shield bears Mowbray, (gu., a lion rampant org.), and 
the sinister Shield displays Segrave, (**., a lion rampt. org., 
crowned or,) the arms of the Duko's mother. The Brother- 
ton label was blazoned of three points at a later period.; as in 
No. 299, Chap. XXVII. Mowbray is sometimes blazoned pur- 
pure instead of gules. On his seal also, John Mowbray, Duke 
of Norfolk, son of the last-named Thomas Mowbray, placed a 
sliield of Brotherton between two Shields of Mowbray and as 
many Ostrich Feathers, the Feathers being a special grant. 
Again, Margaret, eldest daughter of Thomas Plant'agexet de 
Brotherton, charged her seal with three Shields, those of her 
father and her two husbands, John Lord Segrave, and Sir 
Walter Manny : or, three chevronels sa., the middle one charged 
with a lioncel passant of the field (Roll of Arms, a.d. 1337-1350) ; 
but in the Calais Roll of Edward III., this lioncel is rampant. 
I may add that a Castle of Castile appears on either side of the 
reverse of the great seal of Edward II. ; and that Edward III., 
when on his accession ho used his father's seal, added a small 
jleur-de-lys above each of the castles ; whilo on his own first great 
seal,* published in October, 1327, there appear two large fleurs- 
de-lys witltout the castles. 

But, before the usage obtained for marshalling a series of 
distinct and complete coats of arms by quartering so as to pro- 
duco a single compound heraldic composition, the desired com- 
bination of two or evon three coats of arms upon a single Shield 
was frequently effected by forming a new composition from all 
the charges of tho several Shields, or from the most important 
and characteristic of them. Many of the early historical Shields 
of our English Horaldry were unquestionably produced by this 
simple process of Compounding Arms. For example, John de 
Dreux, Duke of Brittany and Earl of Richmond (died a.d. 



154 



MARSHALLING AND INHERITANCE. 



1330), whoso mother was a daughter of Henry III., when he 
accompanied his uncle, Edward I., to the siege of Caer- 
laverock, displayed a banner charged with cheque's or and az., 
(De Dreux,) with a bordure of England, (gu., with eigld lions of 
England,) and a canton ermine to represent the ermine Shield 
of Brittany; No. 116, PI. V. The fine Shield of Prince John 
* of Eltham," second son of Edward II. and of Isabella of 
Franco (admirably sculptured in alabaster with his effigy at 
Westminster), is charged with England within a bordure of France, 
No. 332, PI. XIX. : this is both a true example of compounded 
arms, and also a Shield differenced with a bordure. Thus Mar- 
hhalling gained an important advanco when the counterseal of 
Margaret? second Queen of Edward I., had suggested (as wo 
may presume that it did suggest) the Shield of her husband's 
grandson. This counterseal, one of the most interesting of our 
lioyal Historical Series, bears the shield of England suspended 
from a tree, and surrounded on the field of the seal itself with a 
border of fleur-de-lys ; No. 332 a, PI. LXXXI. The well-known 
Shield of the Bohons, of which so many fine original examples 
are still in existence, has been adduced by Mr. Planche* as a 
remarkable examplo of the early heraldic usago now under con- 
sideration. The blazon of this Shield, No. 201, PI. XX., is azure, 
a bend argent, cotised and between six lioncels rampt. or. »(Seo 
Chap. XVII., Section 3.) The founder of the Bohuns as an 
English family was a Humphrey de Bohun, one of the fortunate 
adventurers at Hastings. His son of the same name acquired 
important territorial possessions near Salisbury, by his marriago 
with Matilda, daughter of the feudal Baron, Edward de Sarum. 
Their son, another Humphrey de Bohun, married Margeria, one 
of the co-heiresses of Mnx&gt;, Constable and Lord of Gloucester 
and Hereford, and their grandson, Henry de Bohun, aj&gt;. 1 199, 
was created Earl of Hereford. Now, the arms attributed to 
the Earls of Salisbury, and borne by the renowned son of Fair 
Uosamond, Wm. de Longesp£e, are azure, six lioncels rampt. or, 



Digitized by Google 



O ANU INHERITANCE. 



155 



No. 200, p. 89 : and these aims the Bohuns may bo considered to 
havo adopted in commemoration of their own advantageous al- 
liance with an heiress of Salisbury. The amis attributed to Milo, 
on the other hand, (and still emblazoned and quartered in tho 
Brass to his descendant, Auanore, Duchess of Gloucester,) 
are gules, two bends, the one or and the other argent; No. 333, 
PL XX. As Lords of Hereford in their own persons, the 
Bohuns evidently placed upon their Shield the silver bend of 
Hereford, interposing it between the two groups into which 
thoir Salisbury lioncels would thus bo divided ; and at the same 
time, further to show their descent from Milo, they appear to 
havo bisected his golden bend bond-wise, and then to have 
cotised their own silver bend with the two bendlets thus 
obtained. Fossibly these bends of the Shield of Milo may be 
horaldic representations of the official batons of that bold war- 
rior, as Constable of the Castles of Gloucester and Hereford ; 
and in the Shield of tho Bohuns their bend in the first in- 
stance may have been regarded as associated with tho office 
and rank of Constable of England, so long held in the De 
Bonus family with their Hereford Earldom. (For a further 
notice of tho arms of the Bohuns, see Chap. XV., Differencing 
by mullets.) 

In Scotland the Stuarts produced a compound Shield by 
encircling their own fesse chequee, (or, a /esse chequee arg. and 
02.,) with tho Royal treasure. In 1374, the seal of Davh), son 
of King Robert Stuart and Euhiemia, Countess of Stra thorn, 
is charged with tho Stuart fesse interposed between the two 
chevrons of Strathern, the whole being within tho treasure: 
and, a.d. 1377, upon the seal of Alan Stuart of Ochiltree, tho 
chequee fesse is surmounted with a bend charged with three 
buckles, such being the arms of Ochiltree. 

Tho Union Jack Flags of James I. and George III. are more 
recent but eminently characteristic examples of compounding 
arms. Seo Chapters VI. and XVIH. 



156 MARSHALLING AND INHERITANCE. 



An easy step in advance from such a composition as the seals of 
the fourth and fifth Earls of Hereford, Nos. 201 and 300, and 
from others of the samo class, leads us on to the true Quartering 
of Arms. This mode of arrangement, indeed, was suggested to 
the Heralds of the Edwards by such Shields as were simply 
quartered for diversity of tincturing, as in the two small Shields, 
No. 330, in No. 33 b, p. 25, and in No. 156, PI. VI. Numerous 
examples of such Shields quarterly of two tinctures occur in the 
early Rolls. 

The process of Quartering divides the field of a single Shield 
into four divisions of equal area, by ono vertical line cutting one 
horizontal lino, as in No. 11, p. 17. Into each of these divisions 
ono of the coats of arms to be 44 quartered " is placed. If there 
are four coats, one of them is placed in each of the four quarters, 
their precedence being determined by their relative importance 
— that is, in almost all cases determined by the seniority of the 
several coats in their present alliance. Should there be two 
coats of arms only to be quartered, the first and fourth quarters 
both bear the most important coat, and the second and third 
quarters bear the other coat; as in No. 355, PL XXIV. In 
the case of three coats of arms for quartering, the fourth quar- 
ter repeats the coat that is charged upon the first quarter ; as 
in No. 359. The Royal Arms of England, (No. 334, Chap. 
XIX., and No. 543 a, PL LIX.,) as now borne by Her Majesty 
the Queen, exemplify a Shield thus quartered with three quar- 
terings : it is charged with, 1 and 4, England ; 2, Scotland ; and, 
3, Ireland. Four coats of arms, when quartered, are placed 
in their proper order of succession, each in ono of the fourquar- 
ters of the Shield, as in No. 361, PI. XXIV. Again, should 
more than four coats of arms require to be quartered upon 
one Shield, the field of that Shield is to be divided, upon the 
same principle as before, into the requisite number of com- 
partments, and such repetitions are to be introduced as the 
special circumstances of each case may render necessary. Thus 



Digitized by Google 



MARSHALLING AND INHERITANCE. 



157 



in No. 15, p. 17, the Shield is quarterly of eight. If one of 
the Shields to bo quartered is itself quartered, it is to bo treated 
precisely as if it were one single coat of arms, and such a coat 
is said to bo quarterly quartered. Quarterly quarters are 
shown in No. 16. The early Heralds also occasionally quar- 
tered impaled coats of arms: but in more recent Marshalling 
impaled coats are held to be ineligible for quartering ; and, in- 
deed, the act of quarterly quartering at once indicates and super- 
sedes an impalement. 

The earliest example known in England of a Shield upon 
which two distinct armorial ensigns are marshalled by quarter- 
ing, is the shield, No. 135, PI. I., upon the monument of 
Alianore, Queen of Edward I., at Westminster. It bears 
quarterly, 1 and 4, Castile; and, 2 and 3, Leon. Its date 
is 1291. These quartered arms were first adopted by the 
father of Queen Alianore, Ferdinand III M on tho union of 
the provinces of Castile and Leon under his rule. In this 
noble monument, the beautiful effigy of tho truly royal Lad}' 
rests upon a plate of gilt latten, that is covered with a diaper 
of castles and lions alternating in lozenges. Upon her seal the 
effigy of tho Queen stands between a castle and a lion in pale to 
the dexter, and a lion and castle in pale to tho sinister : the coun- 
terseal has a shield of England only suspended from a tree. One 
of the smaller enamelled Shields that yet remain upon tho south 
side of the monument of Edward III., in Westminster Abbey, 
is charged with this quartered shield of Castile and Leon impaling 
France ancient and England quarterly. 

Contemporary with the Westminster Abbey Shield is the 
mail-clad and cross-legged effigy in Winchester Cathedral, that 
Mr. Walford has such good reason for assigning to Sir 
Arnold de Gaveston, the father of Piers de Gaveston, the 
favourite of Edward II. This armed effigy has a Shield 
charged with a cross, which quarters, 1 and 4, or, two coics 
passant gtdes, collared and belled az., being the arms of Gas- 



Digitized by Google 



158 MA RSI! A LUNG AND INHERITANCE. 

ton, Viscount de Bearn ; and, 2 and 3, three garbs ; No. 335, 
PL XIX. The presence of the cross in this curious example 
is precisely such a modification of quartering as might, in the 
first instance, have been expected. This cross may have re- 
presented a third Shield, or it may havo been simply either 
a structural or a decorative accessory of the Shield itself. 
This Shield is sometimes assigned to William de Foix. The 
arms of De Foix are, or, three pallets gu. The well-known 
Shield of Piers de Gaveston himself, who was created Earl of 
Cornwall by his hapless friend, tho second Edward, are, 
vert, six eaglets or ; No. 335 b, Plate XIX. They are thus 
blazoned for 44 Le Counte de Cornewaile," in tho Roll of 
Edward II., a.d. 1308-1314. This Shield formed one of tho 
series that wero carved upon the tomb, which supported tho 
effigy that Mr. Walford assigns to tho elder Gaveston. An- 
other of these Shields bore Castile and Leon quarterly, as they 
still appear upon the monument at Westminster. For all 
particulars relative to Sir Arnold de Gaveston, I must refer 
to Mr. Walford's equally able and interesting paper, in the 15th 
vol. of tho Archaeological Journal. 

Somewhat later, Isabella, daughter of PniLip IV. of France, 
the Queen of Edward II., upon tho reverse of one of her seals 
marshals four coats quarterly: that is, 1, England (hor hus- 
band); 2, France (her fathor); 3, Navarre, (her mother); and 
4, 02. a bend arg., cotised potent counter-potent or, for Champagne, then 
a most important appanage of the crown of France ; No. 335 a, 
page 135. In No. 335 c, page 170, I give the Shield of Cham- 
tag ne, in order to show more clearly tho field of the Shield 
between the counter-potencos of the cotises. 

Early in tho year 1340 Edward III. adopted his fourth great 
seal, (seal D. of Willis,) upon which the Royal Arms appeared 
quartering France Ancient and England, as in No. 53G b, PI. 
LVIII. Ill is quartered Shield stands foremost in the blazonry 
of the Boyal Heraldry of England. It appears differenced with 



Digitized by Google 



MA R SHAL L- ING. 



I»F. GAVESTON. 1»K HAH K E 




PIERS DE GAVESTON. 6YMQN TtV MOKTAGtT. 




MARSHALLING AND INHERITANCE. 



159 



the utmost heraldic skill, and impaled and quartered with a 
long array of noble and famous arms ; and, as the Royal Shield, 
with no other change than in the number of the fleurs-de-lys, it 
continued in use until the accession of the Stuarts to the 
English Crown in the person of James I., in the year 1603. 
The change in the 1st and 4th quarters from an azure field 
$emee-de-ly8 or, to a field charged with three golden flcurs-deJys, 
took place during the reign of Henry IV., perhaps in the year 
1403. This samo change had been made by the French Kings 
as early as tho year 1364. I must add that Richard II. appears 
to have quartered England and France, as well as France and 
England; that is, ho sometimes placed England and sometimes 
France in the first quarter. 

Fhilippa, the Queen of Edward III., on her secrotum quar- 
ters her paternal arms of Hainault with those of her husband ; 
thus, this seal is an early examplo of compound quartering. It 
is thus blazoned : quarterly, 1 and 4, grand quarters, England ; 
2 and 3, grand quarters, 1 and 4, or, a lion rampant sa. t for 
Flanders; 2 and 3, or, a lion rampant gu., for Holland; No. 
337. A small Shield bearing these arms exquisitely carved in 




No. 337. Queen Puiliita of Hainault. 

alabaster yet exists upon tho south side of tho monument to 
Queen FmuppA herself in Westminster Abbey. The Shield of 



Digitized by Google 



ICO 



MARSHALLING AND INHERITANCE. 



Hainauli also remains, with another Shield of Navarre, on the 
east end of the monument of Queen Philippa. The arms of 
E. III. (France Ancient and England) impale those of Queen 
Philippa upon a Shield in the Brass to Canon John Sleford, 
a.d. 1401, at Balsam, in Cambridgeshire: he had held the two 
not very consistent offices of Master of the Wardrobe to the King 
and Chaplain to the Queen. A German Herald would have re- 
presented the first and third lions of quarters two and three of 
No. 337 facing to the sinister. See Chap. XXXII. On her other 
seals Queen Philippa impales England with Hainault, and France 
with England and Hainault. 

The first English subject who is recorded to have quartered 
arms, so far as it is at present known, was Symon de Montagu, 
whoso Shield, No. 635, Plate XIX., is marshalled as follows in the 
Roll of Edward II., a.d. 1308-1311 :— 

"Sire Symon de Montagu, quartile de Argent e[de azure; 
en les quarters de azure les griffons de or ; en les quarters de 
argent les daunces de goules." (The " daunces" are equivalent 
to a group of fusils conjoined in fesse across the shield, which 
is sometimes blazoned as a " dancette u or a fesse dancettee.) 
In this composition two distinct coats of arms borne by the 
Montagues are marshalled together by quartering: that is to 
say, — 1. " Argent, a fesse engrailed (or dancettee) of three pieces 
gules y u for " William Montague," (Roll of Henry III.) ; and 2. 
" azure, a griffin segreant or," for " Simon de Montagu," (Roll of 
Caerlaverock, a. d. 1300.); Nos. 636 and 636 A, PL XIX. 

The inventory of his property, made in 1322, one year after 
the death of Humphrey de Bohun, third Earl of Hereford, 
at tho battle of Borougbbridge, incidentally shows that mar- 
shalling arms by quartering two distinct coats that had become 
allied, was practised by English Heralds in the first quarter of 
the fourteenth century. Among the objects particularly speci- 
fied is a courte-pointe, quinte-point, or quilt, embroidered quar- 
terly, "e'carteU" or M quarteU" of tho Arms of England and 



Digitized by 



Digitized by Google 



MARSHSLIil X (&gt;. 

CHAP" EH V .V 




Pbte xx; 

Sififty of John de Hastings, Ear. of Pembroke 
from th* Brass at El syng, Norfolk, AIj 134". 



Digitized by Google 



MARSHALLING AND INHERITANCE. 



161 



Hereford. The Earl had married Elizabeth Plantagenet, the 
youngest daughter of Edward I. ; so, in evident anticipation of 
impalement, he quarters the arms of his consort with his own ; 
and, as the lady was a Princess, her arms appear in precedence 
in the first quarter. In one of his seals the Earl places the 
three lions of England in cusped circles about his own shield : 
PL LXX., 3, (No. 398). 

Those examples thus deprive John Hastings, Earl of Pem- 
broke, of the honour that has been assigned to him of having 
been the first English subject who quartered arms. This Earl 
married Margaret Plantagenet, the youngest daughter of 
Edward III. ; and, in his shield of arms he marshalled by im- 
palement two quartered coats of arms, — his own arms, Hastings 
and De Valence quarterly, and France Ancient and England 
quarterly, the arms of the Princess, his Countess : No. 338 a, 
p. 172. 

In tho fine Brass to Sir Hugh Hastings, at Elsyng in Nor- 
folk, the date of which is 1347, there is an effigy of Earl John, 
(who died in 1375), having his jupon charged with Hastings and 
Dk Valence quarterly; No. 338, PL XXI. This same Brass also 
contains an effigy of Edward III. himself in armour, and his 
jupon of arms bears France and England quarterly. The shield, 
twice quartered and impaled, of tho Earl of Pembroke, forms 
one of the small group, carved with the purest artistic feeling 
in alabaster, that still remains to show how rich and splendid 
was the original heraldic adornment of tho monument of his 
royal mothor-in-law, Queen Philippa; No. 338 a, p. 172. 

In the course of the second half of the fourteenth century both 
quartering and impaling arms gradually became established as 
heraldic usages, and impaled and quartered shields soon began to 
abound ; nor was it long before quarterings in many instances 
wero very considerably increased in their numbers. 

I now give a few additional early examples of both impalement 
and quartering. 



162 MARSHALLING AND INHERITANCE. 

In the well-known Roll of Arms of Henry III., Le Mareschal 
charges a lion rampant gules upon a shield per pale or and vert ; and 
the field of the shield of Fitz Mayhewe, is per pale az. and gu. : 
and in tho same Roll and in the Roll of Caorlaverock, the arms of 
De Vere, De Mandeville, De Say, Le Despencer, De Rociieford, 
and De Beauchamp have tho field quarterly of two tinctures ; \Ym. 
de Beauchamp charges his quarterly shield with a bend, and tho 
De Laci of the first Roll bears a bendlet sable upon a shield quar- 
terly or and gules. Other examples occur in considerable numbers 
in other early Rolls. These early shields may be regarded as the 
prototypes of true impalement and quartering. 

On the monument of Edward III., at Westminster, are two 
noble shields of his own royal arms of France and England quar- 
terly, emblazoned in enamel ; also, five others, all of them 
quartered and some of them impaled also, smaller in size, but of 
equal excellence. 

Another very fine example of the quartered royal shield is 
sculptured in the southern spandrel of the entrance archway to 
Westminster Hall : and other examples, most of them with labels, 
surround tho monuments of Bishop Burohersh (about a.d. 1370) 
at Lincoln, PI. XXXIV ; of the Black Prince at Canterbury ; and 
of Prince Edmond of Langley, at King's Langley. King's College 
Chapel, at Cambridge, also contains a splendid series of sculptured 
examples of the Royal quartered shield of a much later period. 

Upon the Brass of Alianore de Bohun, also at Westminster, 
a.d. 1399, are the following shields: 1. Tho shield of the hus- 
band of the Duchess Alianore, Thomas Plantagenet, Duke of 
Gloucester — France and England quarterly, within a bordure argent : 
2. The shield of tho Duchess herself and her husband impaled ; 
No. 340, PI. XX. Tho Duchess Alianore quarters De Bohun 
and Milo of Hereford, Nos. 201, and 330, VI. XX. 3. The shield 
of the father and mother of the Duchess Alianore— De Bohun 
impaling Fitz-Alan and Warrennc quarterly, No. 341, PI. XX.; 
Fitz Alan is, gu., a lion rampt. or. 



Digitized by Google 



MARSHAIfl/IXG- AXD CADEXCY 
IMPA1/EMEHTS. 



- A - - - ■» &gt; . v . * A ' &gt; 




GDMOND MARi;ARET 
TUDOR. BEATKOHT TIP TOFT HOLLAND PoVHfS 




Plate jlXJl 



MARSHALLING AND INHERITANCE. 163 

In a Roll of Arms, temp. Richard II., (a.d. 1392-1397,) the 
Arms of Thomas, Duke of Gloucester, are blazoned in this re- 
markable manner: — Quarterly, 1. France Ancient: 2 and 3. 
England : 4. De BonuN : and a bordure argent, which encloses only 
the first three quarters. 

In the second of those shields the bordure of Woodstock is not 
dimidiated by the impalement. This is also the case in many 
other early examples of impaled shiolds which are charged with 
bordures. Thus, TnOMAS Holland, Earl of Kent, bore, as a 
special grant from Richard II., the Arms of the Confessor, 
No. 78, PL I, within a bordure ermine, impaling Holland modern, 
that is, impaling England within a bordure argent. Upon the seal 
of this Thomas Holland his shield is charged with the impaled 
arms, having both the bordures complete ; as in No. 342, 
PL XXII. In the Seal, the same composition is repeated upon 
the sleeved jupon of the Earl himself and upon the barding of his 
charger. Considerably later, a.d. 1446, the Brass of Lady Tip- 
toft, at Enfield, displays a shield charged with a double impale- 
ment ; that is, Tiptoft, No. 300 a, PL XV 1L, (arg., a salt ire en- 
grailed gu.) impaling Holland, and this impaled coat impaling 
Powys, No. 300 b, (or, a lion rampt. gu. :) here, as before, the 
bordure of Holland is blazoned without any dimidiation. In 
like manner, upon the seal of Mary of Gueldres, Queen of 
James II., of Scotland, a.d. 1459, No. 344, PL XXII., the complete 
trossure appears upon the impaled shield : bat upon the monu- 
ment of Margaret, Countess of Lennox, the mother of Lord 
Darnley, in Westminster Abbey, one of the shields (all of them 
elaborately quartered) impales Scotland, having the tressure 
dimidiated by impalement, No. 345, PL XXII. In No. 344, the 
arms of Gueldres are, az., a lion rampt. or ; impaling Holland, 
or, a lion rampt. sa., tho two lions respecting each other, after the 
usage of Continental Heraldry. M. Bouton (Nouveau Traite de 
Blason, p. 322,) blazons the arms of Gueldres as, — az., a lion 
rampt. contourne or, crowned and langued gu., impaling Flanders or 

m 2 



Digitized by Google 



164 



MARSHALLING AND INHERITANCE. 



Holland, — or, a lion rampt. sa., armed org., langued gu. ; No. 722, 
PI. ML, drawn from M. Bouton's example. In an illuminated 
MS. of the fifteenth century, in the College of Anns, (Collectanea 
Curiosa, L. XIV.), both the lions are crowned, and the lion of 
Gueldres is also queue fourchie. One of the quartered and im 
paled shields upon the monument of Margaret of Richmond, 
mother of Henry VII., bears France Modern and England 
quarterly, within a borduro compony, which bordure is dimi- 
diated ; No. 346, PI. XXII. : the dexter half of this shield, which 
is placed at the cast end of the monument, bears the arms of 
Thomas Stanley, Earl of Derby. The shield at the west end of 
this fine monument bears Tudor, No. 482, PI. XXXII., impaling 
Beaufort, both the bordures being dimidiated; No. 346 a, 
PI. XXII. /» 

Upon one of his seals John Plantagenet of Ghent impales 
Castile and Leon with Franee and England differenced with a label 
ermine ; and in this instance, in honor of his royal consort, Con- 
stance of Castile and Leon, he places his own arms on the 
sinister side of the shield : in his other impaled shields the arms 
of this Prince occupy the customary dexter half of tho 
escutcheon : he also used seals bearing his own arms without 
any impalement. 

Henry Bolingbroke. afterwards Henry IV., during his father's 
lifetime bore England differenced with a label of Lancaster ; but, 
on the death of John of Ghent, he assumed the arms his father 
had borne, and those arms he sometimes impaled with tho coat 
of the Confessor. On one of his seals, certainly engraved and 
used between Feb. 3, and September 30, 1399, (the dates of his 
father's death and his own accession), Henry bears the Confessor 
differenced with a label of three points, impaling France and 
England quarterly with a label of five points of Brittany, impaling 
Lancaster, and this impaled coat impaling Be Bokun, for Mary de 
Bohun, his first wife, who died a.d. 1394. Tho annexed diagram, 
No. 347, shows this remarkable aggroupment. In the original 



Digitized by Google 



M AHSH AlflfIN 



RUHAK1MI - ANNP.nrlJOHKMIA RICHARD II - ISARKI. FRA.XCF. 




HF.NRY IV .IOA.V..KNAVAIJKF. HKNHY VD - KMX .or YORK 




POWYS HOLLAND HKNRY VI - MAROARETor AN.IOr 




Hj»i- xxjii 



Digitized by Google 



MARSHALLING AND INHERITANCE. 165 

seal, the shiold hangs diagonally from a large helm surmounted 
by the lion crest, and on either side is an ostrich feather 




curiously entwined with a ribbon charged with the word M so ve 

REY NE." 

Upon his monument at Canterbury, Henry IV. charges the 
first and fourth quarters of his shield with France Modern ; and it 
is probable that his Queen Joan shortly after her second marriage 
adopted the three fleurs de lys in place of the field semee de lys. In 
the Canterbury shield, France Modern and England quarterly im- 
pale Navarre and Eureux. 

Henry VI. impaled the arms of his Queen, Margaret of 
Anjou ; and thus his own quartered arms, in No. 352, PI. XXIII., 
are seen to be marshalled by impalement with a coat of nx quar- 
terings. The quarterings of Queen Margaret are blazoned in 
Chap. XIX., Section 5. 

Edward IV., as if he felt it to be a point of honour that his 
Queen should bo distinguished by an heraldic display at least 
equal in its quarterings to tho insignia of her Lancastrian rival, 
granted to Elizabeth Widville on her marriage with him, a series 
of augmentations derived from the armorial insignia of her ma- 
ternal ancestry, all of which were to bo borne quarterly, and 
were duly blazoned on their impaled shield. This example was 
improved in a characteristic manner by Henry VIII., in his grants 



Digitized by Google 



166 MARSHALLING AND INHERITANCE 

of arms to his own successive Consort*. See Chapter XIX., Sec- 
tion 5. 

Joane of Navarre, the second wifo of Henry IV., (she was the 
widow of John de Montfort, Duke of Brittany, and she married 
Henry IV. in 1-403,) impaled with her husband's arms those of 
her father, Charles II., King of Navarre and Count of Eureux; 
and she bore Navarre and Eureux per fesse, the former in chief, 
and the latter (France Ancient charged tcith a bend compony arg. and 
gu.) in base; No. 348, PI. XXIII. Queen Joank also quartered 
Eureux and Navarre, and a shield thus quartered is blazoned upon 
the canopy of the monument to Henry IV. and herself in Can- 
terbury Cathedral. 

Richard II. impaled the Confessor with France and England 
quarterly, and again to the sinister impaled Bohemia for Anne, his 
first Queen, No. 349, PL XXIII. ; afterwards, for Isabella, his 
second Queen, Kichard substituted France Ancient in the sinister 
impalement, No. 350, PI. XXIII.; see also No. 529, PI. XXXV. 

Upon his monument in his own chapel at Westminster, Henry 
VII. displays a shield charged with his royal arms of France 
Modern and England quarterly, impaling the arms of Elizabei h of 
York, that is, quarterly, in the first grand quarter, France Modem and 
England quarterly, for her father, Edward IV. ; 2 and 3. Ulster, 
(or, a cross gu.) ; and 4. Mortimer, — to declare her descent from 
the Houses of both York and Clarenco ; No. 351, PI. XXIII. 

Again, the arms of Kichard III., impaling thoso of his Queen, 
Anne Neville, are blazoned in the Warwick Koll, now preserved 
in the College of Arms, as follows— France Modern and England 
quarterly, in the dexter half of the escutcheon, impaling quarterly, 
1. Neicburgh, (chequee arg. and az., a chev. erm.,) impaling Beau- 
champ, (gu., a fesse between six crosses crosslets or) : 2. Montagu, 
(arg., three fusils conjoined in fesse gu.,) impaling Monthcrmer, (or, 
an eagle displayed vert,) : 3. Neville, (gu., a salt ire arg.,) differenced 
with a label compony of silver and azure : and 4. De Clare, im- 
paling Le Despencer. 



Digitized by Google 



MARSHALLING AND INHERITANCE. 



16Y 



From the Windsor Garter-Plates I obtain the four following 
examples of Marshalling : — 

Sir John Neville, K.G., Lord Montagu, (afterwards Duke of 
Northumberland,) brother of Richard Neville, Earl of Warwick, 
married Isabelle, daughter and hoiross of Sir Edmond Engle- 
thorpe ; and he fell a.d. 1471, at Barnet: Quarterly; 1 and 4, 
Montagu ; 2 and 3, Neville, differenced with a label of three points 
compony arg. and az. ; charged in pretence with an inescutcheon 
bearing, quarterly : 1. Bradstone, {arg., on a canton gu., a rose or) ; 
2. Englethorpe, (gu., a cross engrailed arg.) ; 3. Be la Pole, (az., on 
a /esse, between three leopard's faces or, an annulet gu.) ; 4. Montagu. 

Richard Beauchamp, K.G., Earl of Warwick, (died 1439) : 
Quarterly: 1 and 4, Beauchamp; 2 and 3, Newburgh ; and, in 
pretence, the arms of his wife, Isabelle, daughter and heiress of 
Thomas Le Despencer, Earl of Gloucester : Quarterly : 1 and 4, 
Be Clare; 2 and 3, Le Bespencer. 

Thus these noblemen associated the arms of the great 
Heiresses, their consorts, with their own, in their capacity of 
Knights of the Garter. 

John de Verk, K.G., Earl of Oxford, (his grandfather, another 
John de Vere, married Elizabeth, daughter and heiress of Sir 
JonN de Howard) : Quarterly : 1 and 4, Be Vere ; 2 and 3, Howard 
ancient. 

Henry, Lord Stafford, K.G., (second son of Hknry Stafford, 
second Duke of Buckingham) ; Quarterly : 1. Woodstock, (No. 340, 
PI. XX.) ; 2. Be Bohun, (No. 397) ; 3. Stafford, (or, a ehciron gu.) ; 
4. Be Bohun of Northampton, (No. 398) ; differenced on the fesse 
point with a crescent. 

In our own times, we have seen a very singular example 
of Quartering in the arms of the late lamented Prince Consort, 
No. 353. H.R.H. Prince Albert differenced the Royal Anns 
of England, which he quartered in the first and fourth quarters, 
with a label argent charged on the central point with tho Cross 
of Sr. George— an anomaly in Heraldry, and indeed an heraldic 



Digitized by Google 



168 



MARSHALLING AND INHERITANCE 



contradiction, for which I am altogether unable to offer any 
explanation. Had the Prince borne the Royal Shield of England 
(England, Scotland, and Ireland, quarterly) alone, in that case 
a label for difference would have been both a necessary and an 
expressive accessory to his shield ; but to have differenced tho 
Royal Arms when quarterly quartered, as in No. 353, in heraldic 
language was to suggest, (for it cannot possibly bo said to have 
spoken plainly), that the Koyal Consort of tho Prince was some 
near relative to the Sovereign of England, but not the illustrious 
Lady herself who wears tho Crown of these realms. The 
paternal coat of His late Royal Ilighness, marshalled in the 2nd 
and 3rd quarters of No. 353, is harry of ten, or and sable, a chaplet 
of rue in bend vert, for Saxony. See Chap. XIX., Section VI. 

I concludo this brief series of examples with tho historical 
shield of four quarters, which, next to the Royal Armoury, 
stands at the head of the modern Horaldry of England — the 
Shield of the Earl Marshal, the Dctxe op Norfolk. This 
Shield, No. 299, (as I have already shown) thus marshals four 
coats of arms of high renown in English history: 1. Howard; 
2. De Brotherton; 3. Warrenne ; and 4. Mowbray: No. 299, 
Chap. XXVIII., and No. 394, PI. XXXVII. ; also sec pages 38 
and 153. 

II. The Disposition and Aggroupment of two or more Shields 
of Arms, so that they shall form and constitute a single 
Heraldic Composition. 

In many cases, Marshalling requires that Shields of Anns 
should retain their individual characteristics, while they also 
havo to form associations with other heraldic compositions. 
This is offectod by grouping together tho allied shields. 

Knights of the Garter, the Bath, and other Orders, if married, 
bear two Shields. On the first, placed to tho dexter, are the 
paternal Arms of the Knight himself, being surrounded with tho 
Insignia of his Order of Knighthood. On tho second shield he 



Digitized by Google 



MARSHALLING AND INHERITANCE. 



1G9 



bears his own Arms repeated, without any Knightly Insignia, 
impaling those of his wife, or charged with them in pretence ; 
and this second shield is usually encircled with a garland of 
oak-leaves, as a decorative accessory only, and without any 
heraldic significance : vine-loaves might be very happily com- 
bined with the foliage of the oak about the sinister half of the 
impaled shield. This English usage is not followed in Foreign 
Heraldry. See Chap. XXXII. 

Though not customary in actual practice, a similar arrange- 
ment might be adopted, in exact conformity with heraldic rule, 
in the instances of Archbishops and Bishops who are married : 
as it is, in like manner, by tho Herald Kings. 

A Peeress in her own Bight bears her hereditary arms (without 
Helm or Crest) on a Lozenge, with her Coronet and Supporters. 
If she be married to a Peer, both her Arms and those of her 
husband are fully blazoned, and the Shield and tho Lozenge 
are grouped together to form a single Compound Composition, 
precedence being given to the achievement of tho higher rank. 
If she be married to a commoner, her husband charges her 
paternal Arms ensigned with her Coronet, in Pretence upon 
his own; and she also bears her own Achievement of Arms, 
distinct and complete, as she bore it before her marriage: and, 
in this instance also, the Lozenge and the Shield are grouped 
togother, the Lozenge yielding precedence. 

If the Widow of a Peer should marry a Commoner, she con- 
tinues to bear tho Arms of her former husband, as before, on 
a separate Lozenge ; and, on another Shield her second husband 
impales or charges in pretence her paternal Arms, the two 
forming a siuglo group, tho shield having precedence. Should 
she marry a second peer, sho would not retain tho Arms of her 
former husband, unless his rank had been higher than that of 
her second husband. 

Royal Personages, when married, boar their own Arms, being 
both the Arms of their Dominion and also their Personal Insignia, 



Digitized by Google 



170 



MARSHALLING AND INHERITANCE. 



alone on a separate shield, which is placed to the dexter ; and a 
second shield bears the impaled arms of the husband and the 
wife, the arms of the personage of the higher rank being to the 
dexter. In some instances, quartering is used in the second 
shield instead of impalement, — a practice that ought to bo 
altogether discontinued. 

Two or more shields may bo grouped together by placing 
them upon a mantle of crimson velvet lined with ermine ; or by 
the instrumentality of any such simple accessories as the artist 
may devise. Or it may bo sufficient either to place tho shields^ 
or the shield and lozenge, side by side, or to arrange them in 
such a manner that tho shield to the dexter should rest upon tho 
dexter chief of the other shield or of the lozenge. 




No. 335 c. Chamj'agnk. 
See pp. 135, 158. 



III. Marshalling the Accessories of any Shield, Lozenge or 
Group, is necessarily determined by the circumstances of every 
individual case. 

Tho Accessories are the Helm, Wreatlt, Cap, Crest-Coronet, Crest, 
Coronet, Crown, Mantling, Supporters, Scroll and Motto, Badges, 
and Knightly or Official Insignia. The several characteristics 
and uses of these accessories having been described in Chapter 



MARSHALLING AND INHERITANCE. 



171 



XIV. their treatment in Marshalling requires but brief 
notice. 

The Helm always rests upon tlio Chief of the Shield. Com- 
moners, Knights, and Baronets havo their Crests placed upon 
their Helms, the Crest in every case being sustained by its 
Wreath, Cap, or Crest-Coronet. Peers and Princes place the 
Coronet of their rank upon their Helm, and their Crest, duly sup- 
ported, is placed above the Coronet The Sovereign places the 
Hoyal Crest above tho Imperial Crown The Mantling always 
falls, or is displayed, from the back of tho Helm. The Scroll 
and Motto, and also all Badges, are placed below the shield : but 
should any Motto have a special reference to the Crest, in that 
case such Motto should stand either in chief of tho entire achieve- 
ment, or, if only tho Great and the Shield are blazoned, it may 
intervene between them. Tho SnpjKtrtcrs are to be adjusted to 
the shield or lozenge in such a manner that they may appear 
to be in the act of supporting and protecting it. Supporters 
and Crests also admit Marks of Cadency. 

Official Insignia may bo associated with any Achievement, in 
such a manner as may be best calculated to display them with 
becoming effect. Thus, tho official staves of the Earl Marshal 
are blazoned and crossed behind his shield. An Official Badge or 
Jewel may bo suspended from the shield itself. Other objects 
and devices must determine their own most appropriate display, 
care being taken that tho true Heraldic Achievement should 
maintain its own distinct individuality. 

Knightly Insignia are always associated with Achievements of 
Arms. The Garter and Motto of the Order encircle the shields 
of all Knights of the Garter ; and the Collar, with the 11 Georgo," 
may also bo blazoned about the Garter itself. Knights of the Bath 
encircle their shield with a Red Riband charged with the Motto 
of the Order, and having the Jewel depending. In like manner, 
the Knights of the Thistle and of St. Patrick, of St. Michael and of 
St. George, and of the Star of India, place the Iiibands of their 



172 MARSHALLING AND INHERITANCE. 

Orders with their Mottoes, each about his own shield. These 
Itibands are severally Green, Sky Blue, Deep Blue with a 
Scarlet Stripe, and Light Blue having edges of White. The 
Badge or Jewel of each Order depends from the Riband. The 
Collars also of all these Orders may be blazoned about the shield 
of any Knight: and a Knight of more than one Order may 
display the Insignia of each Order! In like manner, all honour- 
able Insignia of every kind may be displayed in association with 
a Shield or Achievement of Arms. And, in accordance with the 
samo rule, Foreign Orders and Insignia may be displayed, pro- 
vided that they have been duly recognized and admitted in this 
country. 




No. 338 a. Shield of Joiin de Hasting*, K.G., Earl of Pemdboke, quarter- 
ing De Hadhujs and De Valence, and impaling France Ancient and 
England quarterly : from tho Monument of Queen PBIIJFPA, in West- 
minster Abbey. See pp. 160, 161. 



Digitized by Google 



No. 470. No. 471. 

Edward I, as Prince Royal. Henry of Lancaster. 



CHAPTER XV. 

CADENCY AND DIFFERENCING. 

By Cadency Heralds distinguish the different individuals or 
the several branches of the samo family, all of whom, in right of 
their common descont, inherit and bear the same aims. 

Differencing, as distinct from Cadency properly bo called, is 
applied to distinguish the arms of individuals and families who, 
without any tio of blood-relationship, are connected through 
Allianco, or who in early times wore more or less directly affected 
by Feudal Dependency. This term Differencing also denotes 
the secondary charges, by which those shields of arms are dis- 
tinguished that bear tho same Ordinances. 

A shield of arms may thus be " differenced," either by modi- 
fying or adding to the original blazon, whilo retaining its dis- 
tinctive character ; or by introducing upon tho shield some fresh 
charge, which is to tako no part in the actual composition of tho 
arms, but is to have a special and a separate existence of its own 
as a " Difference." 

Tho modified shield, when once adopted, would become in 



174 



CADENCY AND DIFFERENCING. 



fact an independent heraldic composition, and would be per- 
manently retained, whilo yet at the same time it would indicate 
clearly and emphatically both its origin and its allianoes. 

The shield, on the other hand, that in its own blazon remains 
unchanged and without even the very slightest modification, 
but is difftvenced by a 44 Mark," or " Marks of Cadoncy," would 
be borao only as a temporary distinction, contingent upon the 
duration or the change of certain conditions ; and subsequently 
such a shield would altor its Differences or remove them alto- 
gether, in accordance with the new requirements of advancing 
time. In these changes in tho »' Marks of Cadency " which may 
be borne at different times by the same individuals, and in the 
origin of the u Marks" themselves, tho student of Historical 
Heraldry will find lying open before him a wide field for sin- 
gularly interesting and attractive inquiry. 

Occasionally, more than one Mark of Cadency or Difference 
appear in the same shield ; and it also was a practice habitually 
prevalent with the early Heralds to difference their Differences, 
that is, to charge one Mark of Cadency or Difference upon 
another. 

L 1. The foimer of the two processes for Differencing Arms 
may be effected, first, by changing the tincture either of the field, 
or of tho ordinary, or of any other charge, in any Heraldic Com- 
position ; or by simply reversing the tinctures of the field and the 
ordinary and other charges. 

Thus, in the time of Henry III., the two Furnivals appear 
bearing, the one upon a field of gold, and the other upon a field 
of silver, the same red bend and the same six martlets also red. 
This shield, No. 365, Plate XXV., is repeated in the curious 
monument to a lady of the same family in Selby Church, York- 
shire. At the same period the brothers De la Zouche severally 
boar gules, bezante'e, and azure, bezante'e, No. 366. The De la 
Zodches subsequently further difference their shield by intro- 
ducing a canton ermine, as appears in the Brass to Lady 



CADENCY. 



CHAl'TF.R XV 



OK LA 7. Ol'( 'I IK 



DK BKKWYS 



OK LA ZOITHK. 




oAXw 



\ 




OK OALLIOL 



OALTON . 



OK HKOKAVE 





.191 A 



OU( HTRKO 



I'LYNTON 



OITTRK H. 




PAUCOMBB 



OE WARRK 



PAYNELL 



^ \* Sfc 




PiaJp l.XVD 



Digitized by Google 



CADENCY AND DIFFERENCING. 



175 



WiLiiOUGHBY de Eresby, a.d. 1391, at Spilsby in Lincolnshire, 
No. 366 a ; and also by charging their shield with a label azure, 
a chevron ermine, No. 366 b, Plato LX VII., and a bend arg. (Boll 
Ernv. II., 1308-1314) ; and again, by adding a chief ermine, (Roll 
Hick. II.). 

Sir John de Harcourt, a Banneret, in the time of Enw. II. 
bears, or, two bars gn. ; and at the same period a second Sir 
John de IIarcourt, of Leicestershire, reverses these tinctures, 
and bears, gu., two bars or. The Roll of Ei&gt;w. III. gives for 
41 Monsire Le Strange, Baro do Knocking," gu., two lions passant 
arg., and adds that 11 Monsire Le Strange do Blackmcre port le 
revers" — arg., two lions pass. gu. : and again, in tho same Roll, the 
Lord Moulton of Gilsland bears, arg., three bars gu., and the Lord 
Moulton of Frankton "le rcvers." 

Tho De Genevilles, Seigneurs de Broyes, boar, the elder bro- 
ther, sa., three breys or barnacles in pale or, and on a chief erm, a 
demi lion rampt. issuant gu., No. 131 a, PI. XIV.: and the younger 
differences the same arms by simply changing the tincture of the 
field of his shiold from sable to azure ; (Bolls II. III.) These 
arms of the Do Genevilles may be considered to exemplify the 
compounding two distinct coats. The Mortimers difference by 
changing tho tincture of their incscutcheon from argent to ermine, 
Nos. 99 and 99 a, p. 31 ; Hugh de Mortimer, of Chelmarsh, sub- 
stitutes gules for the azure of the original shield ; and (Roll Edw. 
II.), Roger and John de Mortimer severally charge their silver 
inescutcheons with a saliire gules, and a lion rampt. pnrpure. The 
change from argent to ermine for the tincture of the field was fre- 
quently adopted, as by tho Montacutes ; or for the tincture of an 
ordinary, as in their chevron by the Berkeleys. Again, (Roll 
E. IT.), Sir Giles de Brewys bears, arg., crusiUe, a lion rampt. queue 
fourche'e gu. ; and Sir Richard differences this samo shield by 
charging his lion and his crosslets on a fiold ermine, No. 390 a, 
PI. LXVII. Sir Wm. de Brewys bears, az., crusiUe, a lion rampt. 
or, thus changing both the original tinctures ; and another Sir 



176 



CADENCY AND DIFFERENCING. 



William differences this last shield by charging a fleur-delys 
gules upon the shoulder of the lion. Sir John de Brewys, (temp. 
E. III.), introduces another slight modification; he bears, az., 
crusih'e, a lion rampt. or, crmoned and armed gu., (Calais Roll, a.d. 
1347); and, seventy-five years later, the same shield, No. 390, 
PI. XXXVII., is six times repeated in the Brass to another Joiin 
de Brewys, at Wiston in Sussex. In the Calais Boll a second Sir 
John de Brewys appears, who differences simply by bearing his 
lion without a crown. Sir William Fitz Waryn, or Fitz 
Warren bears, quarterly, per /esse indented, arg. and gu., and Sir 
John differences this shield with a label of three points azure, 
(Calais Roll) ; but the Garter-Plato of Sir William Fitz Waryn, 
K.G., (died 1362), changes the argent for ermine. The arms of 
De Ros appear varied in their tinctures in the following manner ; 
gu., three tcatcr-bougets arg., No. 374, PI. XXVII.; then ermine 
takes the place of argent ; and again, the same charges mile are 
blazoned on a shield or. This shield of De Ros appears amongst 
the Windsor Garter-Plates, in the well known effigy in the 
Temple Church, and in the Spilsby Brass, and it is also blazoned 
in the early Rolls of Arms ; in the Roll of Richard II., William 
de Ros bears, gu., three waterbougcts arg., the first charged with a 
crescent sable. 

The Caerlaverock Roll gives an example of a double change of 
tincture in the banner of John Paignel, a friend and comrade of 
the brothers De Hastings, who bears, vert, a maunche or. The 
Earl himself displays the Hastings banner, or, a maunche gu., 
which his brother Edmond de Hastings differences with a label of 
five points vert. This Hastings label sometimes appears blazoned 
sable ; it is vert, however, in the Roll of E. II., as in the Caor. 
Roll. William Bardolf bears, az., three cinquefoils or, (Rolls 
H. III. and Caer.), No. 388 b, PI. XXVII. Another William 
Bardolf, (Roll of E. II.) bears, az., three cinque/oils arg.; and 
Thomas and John Bardolf severally bear, or, three cinquefoils az., 
and gu., three cinquefoils arg. And, once more, Philip D'Arcy 



Digitized by Google 



CADENCY. 

CHAPTER XVT 



de saint qrrcmx DB VXPtttUNUJLM DE saint mnxT IN 




BARDOLF KIT* NICHOJ. BARD 01* ►* 




DE ROM DE HAM. I Ol D'ARCY 




D'ARCY DARCY D'ARCY 




PlaU XXVII 



Digitized by Google 



CADENCY AND DIFFERENCING. 



177 



bears, org., three roses gu. (Rolls H. III., and E. II.) : in the 
Calais Roll this shield is blazoned for Sir John D'Arcy, arg., three 
cinque/oils gu. William D'Arcy differences his shield to, gu. y three 
roses org. (Roll E. II.) ; Robert D'Arcy bears the red roses upon 
silver within a bordure indented sable; Norman, instead of this 
bordure, differences the same shield with a label of three points 
azure ; and John bears, az., crusiUe, three roses arg. (Roll E. II.). 
I must reserve for future consideration other differenced shields 
of both the D'Arcies and the Bardolfs. (See pp. 181, 182.) 

2. Secondly retaining the identity of tho tinctures, the Cadency 
and Differencing may be effected by introducing somo fresh 
charge, of at least a comparatively subordinate character, and in- 
corporating it with the original composition of any shield ; or, by 
slightly varying the chargos that are borne on any shield ; or, by 
substituting one charge for another undor like conditions ; or, by 
associating with one heraldic composition tho distinctive insignia 
of another in such a manner that, while tho original design may pre- 
dominate, the presence of the allied arms may readily bo recognized. 

In tho great majority of instances the minor charges of shields 
wero unquestionably introduced with a view to *' Cadency," 
while loss frequently these same charges may bo considered 
to have appeared in blazon simply for tho purpose of M Differ- 
ence :" and, accordingly, in cither case Heraldry appears to have 
derived the most popular associates of its Ordinaries from its own 
early efforts, more sua, to distinguish and also oftentimes to con- 
nect the different bearers of those simple insignia. When not 
derived from an allied Bhield, the fresh charges introduced by 
the early Heralds for marking Cadency or for Differencing do not 
appear to have been selected upon any definite principle, unless, 
indeed, the idea of a Rebus may be supposod whenever practicable 
to have been recognized as possessing a paramount claim. Small 
Crosses were evidently held in especial esteem ; and, in some 
cases, devices used as Badges may havo been adopted for Dif- 
ferencing. These fresh charges are placed either upon the field 

N 



Digitized by Google 



178 



CADENCY AND DIFFERENCING. 



of the Shield itself or upon the Ordinary, and in the earliest ex- 
amples they are almost invariably many times repeated. As a 
matter of necessity, these charges would be drawn to so small a 
comparative scale, that their presence would not very seriously 
affect the primary idea of the original composition. When sot 
upon the field of any shield, the small charges at first appear 
poudree or semie over the entire area, or arranged to form an or/e, 
or as the old Heralds wrote it, an ourle or urle— this orle or urle 
being a modification of the bordure : the term " urle " is used in 
the Koll of H. III., but poudre'e does not occur till the time of 
E. III., and seme'e is even later : tho treatment which we now 
describe by one or other of these terms poudre'e and semee, is thus 
blazoned in the Roll of H. III., for Rauf le Fitz Nicole, who 
bore, gu., seme'e of escallops arg. t a cinquefoil or, — "de goules ung 
quintefueil de or, le champ pleyn des escallopes &lt;V argent:' At a later 
period, the numbers of the smaller charges are generally reduced 
so as not to exceed six, and they are disposed in some regular 
order; and thus, being also drawn on a larger scale, these 
secondary charges become component members of the heraldic 
composition in which they appear. Later still — that is to say, 
about the middle of the fourteenth century— single small charges 
begin to be used, under special circumstances, u for Difference." 

The idea of differencing shields of arms by means of small 
charges again and again repeated, may possibly have been 
suggested by the early practice of Diapering ; but, whatever its 
origin, this system of marking Cadency from the first is alto- 
gether distinct from any merely decorative It will 
be understood, that the term "Cadency" applies only to the 
differencing of the shields of several members either of the same 
family or of different branches of the same family : at the same 
time it is obvious that by a change of tinctures, by fresh combi- 
nations and dispositions, and by the introduction of various minor 
charges, a series of shields all bearing the same Ordinary may be 
effectually M differenced " for different families who may be allied 



Digitized by Google 



CADE X C Y . 



FI HMVAI. DK LA ZOL'CHB NKWBl HUH 




BKAL'CHAMP BKAITHAMP BKAICHAMH 




BF.AUCBAJV1P CLIFFORD CLIFFORD 




Digitized by Google 



CADENCY AND DIFFERENCING. 



179 



without any blood relationship, or between whom there exists no 
alliance whatever. Trne 44 Cadency," I may add, if traced up 
to its source, will be found in the greater number of instances to 
imply a certain degree of Marshalling. 

3. In the first Roll of Henry III. four shields of Beauchamp 
are blazoned : of these, one is simply vairte—a second is quarterly 
arg. and m., — a third charges a bend gu. upon a field quarterly arg. 
and of the first, and tho fourth is sa., an eagle displayed org., armed 
or. The well known shield of tho Beauchamps, Earls of . 
Warwick, (No. 370, PI. XXV.), accordingly does not appear in 
this group; but the Boll gives tho shield of Dk Newburgh, Earl 
of Warwick, cheque'e arg. and az., a chevron erm., No. 367, PL XXV. 
Tho shield vairte is repeated in the Caer. and the Calais Bolls, 
and in the Roll of Bichard II. In the Caer. Boll also the arms 
of Guy Beauchamp, Earl of Warwick, are blazoned, gu,, semee of 
crosslets, afesse or, No. 368 ; and a third banner of Beauchamp, is 
gu., a fcsse between stx martin or, No. 369, PL XXV. The cross- 
lets were reduced to the same number, six, early in the fourteenth 
century (Boll E. I.). In tho Elsyng Brass, a.d. 1347, in tho 
Beauchamp monuments at Warwick, in the Calais Roll and the 
Boll of Bichard II., and in the Garter- Plates, the Beauchamps, 
Earls of Warwick, bear tho six golden crosslets, No. 370. Sir John 
de Beauchamp, K.G. brother of tho Earl, differences his shield by 
charging a crescent sable upon his fosse, No. 371, (Calais Roll); 
and (Roll of Richard II.), somewhat later, Wm. de Beauchamp 
does the same, while the Earl quarters Beauchamp (crosslets) and 
Newburgh. The Bhield with tho six martlets is repeated for Sir 
Walter de Beauchamp, and within a bordure indented arg. for Sir 
Wm. de Beauchamp, in the Roll of Edw. II. ; without any dif- 
ference it appears, for Sir Giles, in the Calais Roll ; in the Roll 
of Rich. II., Roger de Beauchamp differences the samo shield with 
a mullet sable pierced, charged upon tho fesse : and it is also 
charged with a label azure for an oldest son. Upon a monument, 
about a.d. 1400, in Worcester Cathedral, this martlet shield of 

M 2 



Digitized by Google 



180 



CADENCY AND DIFFERENCING. 



the Beauchamps i8 very effectively blazoned (in this monnmcnt 
the effigy of the lady has the head resting upon a swan of ample 
size), and also in the Brass of the same period to Sir Nicholas 
Dagworth, at Blickling in Norfolk. In other shields of the 
members of different branches of this family, six crescents, or tho 
same number of billets, all of gold, aro blazoned with a golden 
fosse upon a red field. 

The Cliffords, who bear chequee or and az. y a bend gu., in tho 
• Roll of Henry III., No. 372, PL XXV., at Caerlaverock display a 
fesse in place of the bend, No. 373 ; and, subsequently, they 
charge on their bend three lions of England. The Cobhams bear, 
gu., a chevron or. In the Calais Roll this shield, without doubt 
tho original shield of his family, is assigned to Sir John de 
Co nil am, but with the addition of a silver label. A second Sir 
John de Cobham bears, gu., on a chevron or, three lioncels rampt. 
sa., No. 377, PL XXV. : Sir Reginald differences by substituting 
three estoiles pierced, of the same tincture, for the three lioncels, 
No. 379 : another Sir John, a.d. 1420, charges his golden chevron 
with three eaglets sable '(Collections of Nich. Charles, p. 158, in ColL 
Arm.) : and other Cobhams carry out the system by severally 
charging their chevron, which is always golden, with either 
tftree crosslets, or three fleurs de lys, or three crescents, or three mart- 
lets, all sable; (Calais Roll, Roll of R. IX, Seals, Canterbury 
Cloisters Shields, Brasses at Cobham in Kent and Chrishall in 
Essex, and Brass to Sir JonN de Harpedene at Westminster). 
Rauf de Cobham adds an estoile, for a secondary Difference, with 
his crosslets, No. 378, PL XXV. ; (Brass at Cobham, a. d. 1402). 
In another Roll of Edw. III., a fourth John de Cobham is said 
to have borne " gxdes, sur une chevron a" or, trois estoiles de sable, 
entre trois lis le asur ;" the azure of tho fleurs do lys here is pro- 
bably a mistake of the transcriber of the original MS. for argent. 
I must add that in tho Roll of Rich. II., a Thomas de Cobham 
bears, gu., a cross arg. 

Crosslets were evidently the favourite charges for marking 



Digitized by Google 



CADENCY AND DIFFERENCING. 



181 



early Cadency ; some other forms of small crosses also frequently 
occur. And Martlets and Mullets appear to have been held in 
esteem as Differencing Changes, in a degree inferior only to 
that accorded to Crosslots. In the Roll of Henry III., Piers 
de Brewts bears, arg., a lion rampt. az. ; but Wm. de Brewys 
changes this to, az., crusile'e, a lion rampt. or., as I have already 
shown, p. 175. The De Balliols difference, gu., an orle org. iu 
a remarkable manner, No. 645, PI. LXVIL, by placing in the 
dexter chief a small azure inescutcheon charged with a lion rampt. 
crowned or ; and secondly they difference by simply modifying 
tho original blazon to az., seme'e of crosses crosslcts, an orle or, 
No. 376, PI. XXVII. In his Brass, a.d. 1275, Sir Roger de 
Trumpingdon (also Roll E. I.) bears on his shield, az., crusile'e, 
two trumpets in pile or, No. 375, PI. XL VIII. : Sir Giles de 
Trumpington repeats the same arms, somewhat later, (Roll E. II.) 
(See also early stained glass at Trumpingdon). Upon his 
ailettes and upon small escutcheons upon his sword-scabbard Sir 
Roger adds a label of three points, thus corroborating the evi- 
dence borne by his shiold to show that the engraving of this 
interesting Brass was never completed. The arms of De Lucy 
are, gu., three lucies haurient in fesse arg. (Roll H. III). This 
shield is differenced by substituting or for arg., and powdering 
tho field with crosslcts first of silver and then of gold. Six 
shields are blazoned, each with a single cinquefoil, in the Roll of 
IIenry III. Of these one boars the charge of silver and another 
of gold, on a rod field. Fitz Nichol retains the gold and red 
tinctures, but powders his field with silver escallops, No. 388, 
PL XXVII. On a field sable, De Faucombe bears both the 
cinquefoil and an orle of martlets arg., No. 390 a. De CJmphravelle 
adheres to the original tinctures, but adds a bordure az., seme'e of 
Itorsesltoes or, No. 388 a. TnoMAs Bardolph has an azure shield, 
crusilee and with the cinquefoil or — his elder brother, William 
Bardolpii bearing, as 1 have already shown, az., three cinquefoils 
or— No. 388 b. In addition to the shields of his own house, 



Digitized by Google 



182 CADENCY AND DIFFERENCE. 

Thomas de Saint Quintin, a.d. 1445, at Harpham in his Brass, 
has a shield charged with the arms of Thomas Bardolph, 
No. 388 c, PI. XXVII. ; in this example the crosslets are drawn 
fleurie, No. 388 d, PL XL VIII. At Trumpington, Elsyng, 
Warwick, Cobham, and in the earlier Stall-Hates at Windsor, 
the crosslets aro botonee — No. 388 e, PL XL VIII. : this appears 
to be the favourite manner of rendering this popular charge, 
though in many instances its points are cut off square, as in 
No. 83, PL III. The shield of Sir Amorye D'Arcy, in the Calais 
Roll, bears org., within an orle of cinquefoils, an inescutcheon gu,, 
No. 388 f, PL XXVI., and, in the same Boll, Sir William 
D'Arcy differences this shield to az., crusilee, three cinque foils org., 
No. 388 h. Other D'Arcjes bear, org., three sixfoil* gu. ; and az., 
crusilee, three sixfoils org.. No. 388 I : and, for further difference, 
org., within an orle of sixfoih gu., an inescutcheon sa., No. 388 u. A 
monument of the Caerlaverock period at Howden in Yorkshire, 
to a De Saltmarsh, displays a shield, crusilee, charged with three 
sixfoils, No. 389 ; this shield is blazoned, arg., crusilee three roses 
gu., (Boll E. II). In their noble Brass at Littlo Horkesley in 
Essex, a.d. 1412, the shields of the Swynbornes, No. 391, PL 
XXXVII., are, gu., crusilee, three boar's heads couped arg. ; the 
same shield is blazoned in the Roll of Henry III., and the Roll 
of Richard II. Thomas Swynborne differences it with a label of 
three points or, while a William Swynborne bears, per fesse gu. and 
arg, three roses counterchanged, seeded or. A shield semee of qua- 
trefoils, with a wild boar, (sanglier,) in chief, appears in the Ifrass 
to Sir Thomas Massyngberde, a.d. 1405, at Gunby, in Lincoln- 
shire. Sir John Comyn bears, org., crusiUe three garbs gu. 
(Roll E. II). Sir Thomas Dalton bears, az., crusilee or, a lion 
rampt. guard, arg., No. 391 a, PL LXVII. (Calais Roll and 
Roll E. II.) Bawdwyn Beresforde (Roll R. II.), bears, arg., 
three fleurs de lys, two and one, between six crosslets fitcMes sa. John 
Warre, Richard Louel and Geoffrey Hauteville severally 
bear, gu., crusilee, a lion rampt. arg. ; or, crusilee, a lion rampt. az. ; 



Digitized by Google 



igitized by Google 



C A I) K X C V . 



l&gt;E SAI.TMAHSH. OK HHF.WYS I)R SHTNRORNK. 




(VH IMHTONK GKEV1LLE. CLYlfTUJi. 




Pi.it* xxxvi; 



Digitized by Google 



CADENCY AND DIFFERENCING. 



mas 



183 



and, sa., crusiUe or, a lion rampt. arg., No. 391 B., PI. LXVII. 
In the Roll of E. I., John de la Warbe bears the same shield ; 
but William de Warre bears, gu., a lion rampt. queue fourchSe 
arg., over all a bendlet sa. The red shield of the Berkeleys, with 
their chevron variously tinctured, appears in the early Rolls 
powdered with either silver crosses patties, silver crosses crosslets, 
silver cinque/oils, or silver roses, Nos. 392, 393, PI. XXXVII. 
(See the shield andjupon of the effigy in Bristol Cath., Seals, 
Roll E. I., and Collections of Nicholas Cliarles, p. 228, in Coll. 
Arm.) The Borkeley shield is further differenced with either a 
laid azure or a bordure argent ; and in the Roll of II. III. Mau- 
rice de Barkele bears simply, gu., a cheveron arg. I am not 
able to show that as a Berkeley originally bore a silver chevron 
without any other charge, so a Howard once bore a silver bend 
alone upon a field gules ; but I see no reason for doubting that 
the Howard of an earlier time than that of Ed. II. placed the 
crosses crosslets upon the well known shield of his house for 
Difference : the blazon of this shield is, gu., a bend between six 
crosslets fitchees arg. No. 394, PI. XXXVII. See Chap. XXVIII. 
and No. G13. At Checkenden, Bucks, the spirited effigy of a 
mail-clad De Montfort exhibits the remarkable shield of that 
family differenced with crosslets fitchees : it may be thus bla- 
zoned, gu., crusilee fitchee, a lion rampt. queue fourchee arg., preying 
on an infant ppr. ; in this example the sculptor has represented 
the lion facing to the sinister, No. 399, PI. XLIX. In the Roll 
of E. II., the De Montfort Crosslets are not fitchees. And, onco 
more, the shield of the Botilers, Barons of Wem, affords another 
example : it is, gu., between six crosses patces fitchees arg., a fesse 
counter-componee sa. and of the second. 

4. In one of the Rolls of H. III., the red pile of Chandos 
appears differenced with mullets : this shield, No. 127, PI. VI., 
is, or, a pile gu., charged with three mullets of six points gold, between 
as many others of the second. In the Calais Roll, William Clynton, 
Earl of Huntingdon, bears arg , six crosslets fitchees sa., and on a 



Digitized by Google 



184 



CADENCY AND DIFFERENCING 



chief az., two mullets or, No. 400, PI. XXXVII. : but Thomas 
Clynton retains a simpler shield, org., on a chief az., two mullets of 
six points or, pierced gu., and lie adds over all, a label of three points 
arm., No. 400 a, PL LXVII. At Caerlaverock, the brothers 
Bassett, who both bear, erm., a chief indented gu., difference their 
shields by severally charging their chiefs with three mullets and 
three escallops or, Nos. 402, 403, PL XXXVII. The earliest 
known seal of the Douglasses, the secrotum of William, Lord 
Douglas, a.d. 129G, bears simply, arg., on a chief az. three mullets 
of the field: tho Royal Heart first appears on the field of the 
shield, a.d. 1355, on tho seals of William, first Earl Douglas ; 
and tho Heart is ensigned with a Crown, a.d. 1617, on the seal of 
William, eleventh Earl of Angus: the five shields upon the 
monument of the Countess of Lennox, at Westminster, a.d. 1577, 
have in pretence tho Douglas shield bearing tho three mullets 
and tho heart without a crown ; the Garter-Plate of James, 
Earl Douglas, K.G., however, displays the crowned heart : See 
No. 177 a, PL XIV. (See Seton, p. 224.) The St. Johns, in 
like manner, bear mullets on a chief. John de St. John, org., 
on a chief gu., two mullets or; and his son, John tho younger, 
differences this shield with a label of five points azure ; Nos. 404, 
404 a, PL XXVIII. Another John de St. John, instead of 
tho label, differences with a bordure indented sa. ; Roger changes 
the tincture of the field from argent to ermine; and another 
brother of tho same house bears, org., crusilee sa., on a chief gu. 
two mullets or, (Roll E. II.). Sir Edmond Bacoun modifies the 
St. John shield thus, gu., on a chief arg., two mullets sa. Tho three 
shields which follow are blazoned in the first Roll of H. III. : 
R. de Shastone, gu., on a bend arg., three mullets az,; R. de 
Moelles, org., two bars, and in chief as many mullets gu. ; and 
William D'Odingseles, arg., a fesse, and in chief two mullets gu. 
In tho Roll of Ed. I., the mullets of William D'Odlngseles have 
six points, aud his brother has a single mullet only. In this same 
Roll, tho shield of Rauf Daubeny is blazoned, gu., four fusils 



Digitized by Google 



C A DENC V . 



r 



ST JOHN 



ST JOHN 



GRAHAM 




U'AUBYOXK. 



1J AI'BYlrNE. 



D AFHYGNE. 




1&gt;E DKYVIM.K. 



DE PEVVKR 



AT HELBY 





1&gt;K HAl' HKCOI 'HTK. I IF. WKA1 r N!&lt; TNTE 



f)E POTKNHAU. 



\$ H 





Digitized by Google 



Digitized by GoogU 



CADENCY AND DIFFERENCING. 



185 



conjoined in fesse arg., No. 405, PI. XXVIII. (See also the same 
shield upon the pommel of the sword-hilt of Sir Giles Daubeny, 
K.G., in Westminster Abbey, a.d. 1507.) In the year 1345, 
a monumental slab was sculptured and placed at Norton Brise 
in Oxfordshire, to commemorate Sir John Daubygn£. It is a 
very remarkable composition in every respect, and singularly 
interesting in its Heraldry. Four of its five shields are charged 
with the arms of Daubygne\ Of these one bears, two chevrons 
within a bordure engrailed ; in the Boll of Henry III., William 
Daubeny bears, or, two chevrons within a bordure gu. The second 
of the Norton Brise shields bears Daubygn£ as in the Roll of 
Edward I., No. 405, PL XXVIII. ; the third shield charges each 
fusil tcith a pierced muUei ; and the fourth bears the fusils erm., 
with the addition of three mullets in chief ', No. 406. Philip 
Daubeny bears, three martlets above his silver fusils ; No. 408 a ; 
and Elys differences by simply charging an azure bendlet over 
all. At p. 134 I give a representation of the achievement of 
Sir John Daubygn^, No. 408, drawn from the original monu- 
ment ; he himself is thus seen to bear the shield, No. 407 ; his 
Crest is a pierced mullet within a wreath of olive-leaves, and his 
Mantling is also powdered with pierced mullets. Again, Sir 
Thomas Ughtred bears (Calais Roll), gu., on a cross fteurie or, 
Jive mullets so., No. 401, PI. XXXVII. This shield is differenced 
as follows : by Sir Robert Ouctred (Roll E. II.), or, on a cross 
pattee gu.,four mullets of the field, No. 401 A, PI. LXVII. ; and by 
Thomas Oittrich (Roll R. II.), gu., on a cross patonce or, five 
mulli is of six points pierced of the field, No. 401 b, PI. LXVII. 

In the first and fourth quarters of his shield, the present Earl 
of Vkrulam bears, arg., on a fesse sa., three mullets of six points or, 
pierced gu., in the dexter chief an ermine spot for difference. This 
shield, No. 395, PL XXXVII. is engraved on a brass plato with 
an inscription to Sir Edward Grimston, in Rishangles Church, 
Suffolk, a.d. 1599 : also Roll Richard II. The Les Despensers 
charge their bend, No. 107, PI. V. with three mullets, for Differ- 



Digitized by Google 



186 



CADENCY AND DIFFERENCE. 



ence, and they also engrail the bend itself, (Calais Roll). In 
like manner, in the year 1337, William de Bohun, Earl of 
Northampton (afterwards a Knight Founder of the Garter), 
differences his paternal shield by charging upon the silver bend 
three mullets of six points. In the Calais Roll these mullets are 
blazoned gules, but they are also elsewhere tinctured sable. The 
shields of this renowned Baron and of his son, both drawn from 
their seals, are placed side by sido in Plate XX., Nos. 397, 398. 
It will bo seen that in No. 398 the coiises are better developed 
than in the shield of the earlier Humphrey de Bohun, No. 201, 
the father of the Earl of Northampton. The shield of the De 
Bohuns, both with and without a label, is blazoned in the Rolls 
of Henry III., Edw. I., and Caerlavorock ; it occupies a foremost 
place amidst the Stall-Plates of the Knights of the Garter, 
No. 629, PI. LXVI. ; it yet lingers over what remains of the 
once honoured burial-place of their powerful family, the Llan- 
thony Abbey, founded by themselves near Gloucester; it ap- 
pears, finely sculptured, both alone and impaling Fitz Alan and 
Warrenne, in places of distinguished honour at Canterbury ; 
and it occurs repeatedly in the Heraldry of both Seals and 
Monuments — as in the Seals of Henry IV. and Thomas of Wood- 
stock his ill-fated uncle, and also in those of the Staffords, Dukes 
of Buckingham, in the Brasses at Westminster, Spilsby, and 
Exeter, and the Beauchamp Chapel monument at Warwick. 

5. The Martlets that are charged upon the shield attributed to 
the Confessor, No. 78, PI. I., have been assumed by Mr. Planch£ 
to have been derived from the impress of the pennies of the last 
Saxon Edward, which are stamped with a plain cross between 
four doves. (See Pursuivant of Arms, p. 93, where one of these 
coins is figured.) This shield of St. Edward, which appears at 
the head of the fine early series in Westminster Abbey, may 
have suggested the adoption of the Martlet as a Differencing 
charge. The Furnivals, whether at a still earlier period they 
did or did not bear their bend alone, in the Roll of H. III. 



Digitized by Google 



CADENCY AND DIFFERENCING. 



187 



appear differencing with martlets. (See p. 174, and No. 365, 
PL XXV.) The Louterels and the Mounteneys, also early 
bearers of bends, in like manner associate martlets with their 
Ordinary : thus, Sir Andrew and Sir Geoffrey Louterel severally 
bear, or, a bend between six martlets sa., and arg., a bend between six 
martlets sa. ; Sir Ernauf Mounteney bears, az., a bend between six 
martlets or, which one Sir John further differences with a mullet 

* 

gu. charged upon the bend, while a second Sir John blazons this 
last combination upon a field gu., and a third Sir John upon a 
field gu. bears a bend cotised between six martlets or, No. 413 c, 
PL LXVIII. ; Roll E. II. The same Roll of E. II. gives for 
Sir Roger Brabazon, gu., on a bend or, three martlets sa., and for 
Sir Renard le Gros, quarterly arg. and az., on a bend sa., three 
martlets or. The Beauchamps, as I have shown, (p. 179,) differ- 
enced their golden fesse with six martlets : and Sir John de Lacy 
bears or, a fesse and in chief three martlets gu. : Sir S. de Cheney 
bears the same on afield argent: and Sir T. Blount bears, gu., 
a fesse between six martlets arg. Again (Roll R. II.), John 
Burdet bears, az., two bars or, each charged with three martlets gu., 
and John Bagot, arg., a chevron gu., between three martlets so. 

Martlets were also commonly borne for Difference so arranged 
as to form an Orle or Bordure. Thus, in the Roll of H. III., 
Roger de Merley bears, harry of six arg. and gu., a bordure gu. 
charged with martlets or, No. 412, PL XLVIII ; Walter de Fau- 
combe bears, sa. a cinquefoil within an orle of martlets arg., No. 390 b, 
PL LXVII. ; and Franc de Boun, gu., a crescent within an orle 
of martlets erm., No. 413, PL XLVIII. Sir Wm. de Paynel 
bears, arg., two bars sa., within an orle of martlets gu., which Sir 
Thos. Paynell modifies by bearing his two bars azure on afield or, 
retaining the orle of martlets unchanged, No. 412 a, PL LXVII. 
I may here observe that in the original Roll of Edw. II. the 
blazon of the shield of Sir Wm. Paynel describes the martlets as 
"en la maner de bordure assis." Again, Sir William and Sir John 
Vaus bear, org., within an orle of martlets, an inescutcheon gu. ; and, 



188 



CADENCY AND DIFFERENCING. 



gu., scmSe of martlets or, and on an inescuteheon gold tico lions passant 
azure, No. 413 a, PL LXVI1I. Sir Thomas Ekpinguam, K.G. 
(a.d. 1425), bears, vert, an inescutcheon within an orle of martlets arg., 
No. 643, EL LXVUT. (Garter-Plate, and 44 Erpingham Gate " 
to the Cathedral Close, Norwich.) 

The orle of martlets, once more, that is so happily effective in 
tho shields of William and Aymer de Valence, No. 101, PI. V., 
and PI. VII., is another familiar example of the use of this 
favourite charge in early Cadency. Tho paternal shield of these 
distinguished Barons was simply barrtdy (the bars sans nombre) 
org., and az., No. 414, PI. XXXVIII. This shield was once 
blazoned upon the Westminster Monument, and it is still pre- 
served in connection with the curious semi-effigy of E thelmer or 
Aymer de Valence, brother of Earl William, Bishop of Win- 
chester, in Winchester Cathedral. I have engraved this relic in 
my ** Christian Monuments." Upon this shield a label gules is 
charged, for an eldest son, No. 415— the arms of the Counts of 
Lusionan. Then, upon tho barruly field there is introduced — 
possibly to compound two Coats of Arms — a lion rampt. gu., 
crowned or, — No. 416. Tho orle of red martlets succeeds, No. 101 ; 
and at tho same time, three crowned lioncels of the same tincture 
modify tho Difference effected by the single lion, No. 417 : this 
last shield, No. 417, remains in the Westminster Monument, the 
original enamel being still fresh and brilliant. And, once more, 
Guy, tho younger brother of William de Valence, so far alters 
tho shield of his house, that he bears, arg., three bars az. over all a 
bendlet gu. : I add this shield, No. 418, to complete the De 
Valence group, in which the student will observe that the 
tincture, gules, is retained in all these shields for their varied 
Differences. Tho Count De Kochefoucault, who was descended 
from the Lusignan family, bears, barry of ten arg. and az., three 
chevronels gu. Another group of shields, three in number, may bo 
associated with the shields of the De Valences, in order to ex- 
emplify more fully their system of marking Cadency : these aro 



Digitized by Google 



C A I) K X C V . 



chaptf?. y *; 



DK VALEXCE 



DE VALENCE 



DE VALENCE 



mm 





DK VALENCE 



de VALENCE 



DK VALENCE 



3$ 



\ 




— 7g) — y 


DE CHAWDRTM 
















DE HVTHKH 







DK Of AM'OKTH 



1 


B 















DE CHAKORTH 



4.0 




PAR VS. 



DE FREfiSEL 



I v — I 





Digitized by Google 



CADENCY AND DIFF 



189 



the shields of the De Chawortiis, which severally are blazoned, 
barruly arg. and gu., an orle of martlets sa. ; then three martlets, two 
and one, sa., take the placo of the orle ; and, finally, a bendlct 
supersedes the martlets altogether; Nos. 419, 420, and 421, 
Plate XXXVIIL (See Aspilogia, L 55, and PhiUpot (mullet) 
p. 55, in Coll. Arm.) In the Boll of Enw. II., Sir Patrick 
Chaworthe bears, harry or and az., an orle of martlets sa. (See 
Chap. XVI., 11 Cadency of the De Beauforts.) 

6. The always beautiful Fleur de lys appears as a Differencing 
charge in the blazon of early shields. It would seem, indeed, 
that the fleure de lys which aro scattered over the field in the old 
arms of France, were designed to mark a difference from a 
kindred shield charged with a single de lys, as, subsequently, 
the shield seme'e de lys, was differenced by Bordures, Bendlets 
and Cantons: or, if not thus in itself an actual example of 
heraldic Cadency, the shield that is so well known as France 
Ancient (No. 2, p. 12,) could not fail to be regarded as eminently 
suggestive, when the Heralds of England for the first time were 
engaged in working out some system of differencing arms. In 
the early examples of France Ancient the fleurs de lys aro very 
small, and they aro scattered thickly over the field : thus, in the 
shield sculptured in the north choir-aisle of Westminster Abbey 
there aro no less than eighteen complete fleurs de lys and parts of 
eight others : another early example of this shield I give in 
Chap. XXIV., Section 1. In the Roll of Henry III., Robert 
Agotx)n bears, gu., a single fleurs de lys arg. ; and tho shield of De 
Tatelow .is, gu., three fleurs de lys or. A remarkablo incised 
monumental slab at Abergavenny has a shield charged also with 
throe large fleurs delys, No. 425 a, PI. XXXIX. Vincent (MS. 
SS. in Coll. Arm.) gives the seal of Melicent de Monte Alto (De 
Montault), a.d. 1235, with her effigy between two shields, tho 
dexter shield bearing a lion rampant, and tho sinister shield three 
fleurs de lys ; at Stradsett in Norfolk there is a noble monumental 
slab, despoiled of its cross, shields and inscriptions, to Emma, 



Digitized by Google 



190 CADENCY AND DIFFERENCING. 

widow of Richard Fitz John and of Robert de Montault, a.d 
1329, who also displayed upon hor seal an interesting heraldic 
combination : (See Archeeol. Journal, XV., 280). Fleurs de lys 
thus borne in small, or comparatively small numbers, as primary 
charges, are not of very frequent occurrence. William de 
Pkyver bears, (Roll H. III.), arg., on a chevron gu., three fleurs de 
lys or, No. 423, PI. XXVIII. This shield is repeated in the Roll 
of Edw. II. for John de Peyvre, and borne also by Roger Peyvre 
with the chevron azure. John de Deyville (Roll H. III.) modifies 
this composition to, or, on a fesse gu., three fleurs delys the central 
one reversed gold, No. 424. A second John Deyville (De Yuile) 
(Roll E. I.) bears, or, on a fesse gu., two fleurs de lys gold, between 
four others of the second, No. 424 a, PI. LXVIII. ; and the Roll of 
E. II. repeats this last shield for Johan de Deyville. One of the 
shields in the Selby monument bears three fleurs do lys, all of 
them erect, upon a fesse, No. 425, PI. XXVIII. The Brass to 
Sir John Giffard, a.d. 1348, which has lately been restored to 
Bower Gifford Church in Essex, upon a field beautifully diapered 
bears, six fleurs de lys, three, two and one, No. 425 b, PI. 
XXXIX. John Neville, (Roll E. II.) bears, gu n crusiUe, 
three fleurs de lys org., No. 424 b, PI. LXVIII. The shield 
of Sir Theobald de Rachecourte, blazoned in the Calais 
Roll, displays the singular arrangement of five golden fleurs 
de lys set in saltire upon a sable field, No. 426, PI. XXVIII. 
Richard Hakebut bears, arg. on a bend cotised gu. three fleurs de lys 
or, No. 426 a, PI. LXVIII. Henry de Cobham bears, gu., on a 
chevron or, three fleurs de lys arg. In the Roll of Rich. II., the arms 
of John Walsh and Alnack de Anlaby are arg., a chevron between 
three fleurs de lys sa., and, arg., a fesse between six fleurs de lys sa. 
Shields not unfrequently have their field fleuretUe or semee of 
fleurs de lys : thus, the original shield of the Hollands bears, az., 
fleurettee, a lion rampt. arg., No. 637, PI. LXV. In the Calais 
Roll, Sir Thomas and Sir Otho Holland both bear this shield, the 
former charging the shoulder of his lion with an annulet sable, and 



Digitized by Google 



CADENCY AND BADGES. 

CKAFT7R XVI 



F1TZ RALPH HHOMH.KTE 




AT A Fl K R t» AVF. N N Y. DE TANTELIPK 




Digitized by Google 



CADENCY AND DIFFERENCING. 



191 



the latter with a crescent of the same tincture, for Difference : (see 
also Ashmole'b blazon of the Arms of the Knights of the Garter.) 
The De Bkaumonts, in like manner, bear the field of their shields 
semee de lys. The arms are, az., semce de lys, a lion rampt. or. An 
example of this coat occurs in one of the shields of the Spilsby 
Brass, No. 427, PL XXVIII. Other branches of the same family 
change the tinctures to gules and argent, they substitute an orle of 
silver crescents for the field fleurettee, and they place over all either 
an azure label or a bendlet compone'e arg. and gu. In the Calais 
Roll, Sir Thomas Bkaumoxte bears the crescents, No. 638, PI. 
LXVIII., and Sir John Beaumonte, the younger, adds a label to a 
similar shield. Again, at a considerably later period (a.i&gt;. 1C22), 
Lionel, BaronCaANFiELD bears, or, on a pale az., three fleursdelysgold. 

The Brass to a Fitz Ralph, at Pebmarsh in Essex, near Clare, 
about a.d. 1320, has a differenced shield of the De Clares, which 
charges each chevronel with three fleurs de lys, and surrounds the 
whole with a bordure : in the Roll of Edward II. the arms of Fitz 
Ralph are blazoned, or, three chetronels gu., fleurettee org., No. 422, 
PI. XXXIX. In the east window of the south aislo of the 
church at Pebmarsh, two of these shields of Frrz Ralph appear 
charged upon panels of rich blue glass, within quatrcfoils formed 
of gold and black. Another similar panel contains a correspond- 
ing shield bearing, quarterly arg. and gu., on a bend sa.,five annulets or. 
These aro very fine examples of Heraldry in stained glass, temp. 
Edward IX (See also Collections of Nicholas Charles, p. 139, in Coll. 
Arm.) In the arms of Sir Thomas Bromflete, in his Brass at Wim- 
ington in Bedfordshire, a.d. 1430, the fleurs de lys assume a very 
peculiar position : his shield, No. 426 b, PI. XXXIX., bears, «a., 
a bend fieurie counter -flcuric or. This shield tho Bromfletes further 
difference by charging their bend with three hurtes. This bend 
of the Bromfletes naturally directs tho attention of students to tho 
Royal Tressure of Scotland, which is also flcuric counter-Jleurie ; 
Plates V. and XXII. Lawrence Hameldene (Roll E. II.) uses 
the fleurs de lys for cadency after a different fashion ; ho bears, 



192 



CADENCY AND DIFFERENCING. 



arg., frcltic gu., the frette fleurettee, No. 634, PL LXVIII. Tho 
shield of the De Cantelupes, again, furnishes another curious 
instance of tho use of tho same charges, which have been placed 
in strange association with lion's faces evidently with a view to 
compound two coats of arms. The blazon of this shield, for 
William de Cantelupe at Caerlaverock, is, gu., between three lion's 
faces jessant de lys or, a f esse vair : in the Roll of E. I. William de 
Cantelo omits the fesse, No. 426 c, PI. XXXIX. 

7. Tho arms of Fitz Nichol, No. 388, PI, XL VIII., are, gu., 
semke of escallop-shells arg., a cinquefoil or ; tho original blazon of 
this shield is thus given in tho Roll of IT. III. — " de goules ting 
quintefueU de or, le champ pleyn des escallopes cTargent" Tho 
escallop shells appear again upon the shield of De Bigot, who 
bears, or, on a cross gu., five escallops arg., No. 639, PI. LXXI. 
Again, the arms of the De Grahams are, gu., a saltire and chief 
org., the latter charged with three escallops of the field, No. 409, PI. 
XXVIII. In the Roll of R. II., a Plompton bears, az., five 
fusils in fesse or, each charged with an escallop gu., No. 640, PI. 
LXXI. Earlier in tho fourteenth century, Sir Radf de Hemen- 
hale bears, or, on a fesse between two chevronels gu., three escallops 
arg., No. 641, PI. LXXI ; Sir Gilbert le Boun or Bohun charges 
the bend of tho Bohun shield (No. 397, PI. XX.) with three 
escallops gu., (Roll of E. III.) ; Henry Spencer first differences tho 
old shield of the Le Despencers in the year 1476 by charging 
three escallops argent on the sable bend, and the arms thus dif- 
ferenced are now borne by both the Duko of Marlborough and 
tho Earl Spencer. Again, Sir J. Fastolf, K.G., bears, quar- 
terly or and az., on a bend gu., three escallops arg. Sir W. de Acre 
bears, gu., three escallops arg., which Sir Edmon differences by 
bearing the field of his shield scmee of trefoils or, No. 642, PI. 
LXXI ; (Roll E. II.). Again, Thos. de Wennesley bears, erm., 
on a bend gu., three escallops or ; Wm. Oogsale, org., a cross between 
four escallops sa, ; Wauter Strykeland bears, sa., three escallops, 
two and one, arg. ; Wauter Taylboys boars, org., a saltire gu., on a 



Digitized by Google 



CADKXC y 



CJi AFTER XV 



II.WIKLIH'NK 




:.xviii 



digitized by Google 



Digitized by GoOQle 



CADENCY AND DIFFERENCING. 



193 



chief of the last three escallops of the field; and the shield of John 
de Dabrichecourt displays, erm., three bars humetUe gu., each 
charged with as many escallops or ; Roll R. II. 

8. In his offigy at Ryther, in Yorkshire, Sir William de 
Ryther, a.d. 1275, bears a shield charged with three Crescents, 
No. 427 a, PI. XXXVIII. In the Roll of E. II., another 
William de Ryther bears, az., three crescents or. Franc le Boun, 
in one of the earliest Rolls, bears the same shield, the tinctures 
being sa., three crescents or. The Brass to Robert Parys, a.d. 
1408, at Hildersham in Cambridgeshire, is charged with a cross 
fleurie, and has two crescents in chief ; No. 427 b. 1 have already 
given, from the other Roll, for Franc le Boun, a shield charged 
with a single crescent, within an orle of martlets ; No. 413, Pl.XL. 
Again, in the Calais Roll, John de Potenhall bears, or, on a fesse 
arg., three increscents of the field ; No. 428, PI. XXVIII. Sir 
Robert de Farnham bears, per pale org. and az., four crescents 
counter-changed ; and Sir John de Welle, gu., within a bordure 
componee or and az., six crescents org. ; (Roll E. II.). Nycol de 
Clyfton bears, 8a., on a bend org. three crescents gu., in the sinister 
chief a crescent of the second ; and Thos. Cheyne, az., on a fesse 
nebulee, between three crescents or, a fleur de lys gu. ; Roll R. II. 

0. The Berkeleys, as I have already shown, No. 393, PI. 
XXXVII. bore Boses for difference. In the Caer. Roll, the 
banners of the Earl of Laonis or Lothian and his son PATRICK of 
Donbar bear, gu., a lion rampl., within a bordure arg. stmie of roses 
of the field, No. 429 A, PI. LXXL, tho son adding an azure label. 
No. 429, PL XXXII. (In tho Herald and Genealogist, II., 9 and 
.**4, attention is directed to tho correct rendering of "Laonis * by 
Lothian and not Lennox, a correction made by the learned author 
of " Law and Practice of Scottish Peerages," 1842, p. 988.) Again, 
Simon de Fressel bears, 8a^ six roses arg., No. 431 ; and (Roll of 
IT. III.) Philip D'Arcy bears, org., three roses gu. This shield 
1?obert D'Arcy differences by placing it within a bordure indented 
noble; Norman D'Arcy substitutes a label for tho bordure; 

0 



Digitized by Google 



194 CADENCY AND DIFFERENCING. 

William counter-changes the tinctures; and John bears, az., 
crtmlee, three roses org. ; Nos. 388 K and L, PI. LXXI. ; sco also, 
Nos. 388 f, g, H, 1, k, PI. XXVII. Rob. Knolles bears, gu., on a 
chevron arg., three roses of the field ; Wm. de Oosyngton, az., three 
roses, two and one or ; and Rich, de Bkulee, quarterly arg. and gu.. 
a rose counter- changed, seeded or ; Roll R. II. In early blazoning 
but little difference appears to have been recognized between 
sixfoils and roses. Garlands or chaplets, or roses with or with- 
out leaves, were borne as charges, and they may have done duty 
as Marks of Cadency. At Caerlaverock, Ralph de Fitzwilliam 
bore a banner, harry arg. and az., charged with three chaplets of 
roses ppr. ; No. 432, PI. XLIX ; (also Roll E. II.). William 
Bassktt bears, arg., two bars, and in chief three chaplets of roses gu. ; 
(Roll E. I.). Another example of a shield bearing three chaplets 
of roses, occurs in the Brass to Roger Elmebrigge, a.d. 1430, at 
Beddington in Surrey. This shield, which exemplifies a very 
singular manner of drawing the roses, also bears two chevronels, 
and it has a label of three points ; No. 432 a, PI. XLIX. In the 
Brass this shield appears both alone and impaled by Elmebrigge, 
cheqtifo arg. and sa. ; and, consequently, it is an example of dif- 
ferencing by a label in the arms borne by a lady. 

10. The Dein courts bear, az. bilettee, a fesse dancette or ; No. 
410, PI. XL VIII. ; (Rolls of Henry III., Edward III., and Caer.) 
Sir Edmond de Gacelyn, or Gaceline, bears, or, bilettee az. ; and 
this shield Sir Walter and Sir John difference, the one with a 
label of five points gu., and tho other with a bendlet gu. ; Roll E. II. 
The shield of Lodvaine, Loveyne or Lovayne is, gu., biUetiSe or, a 
fesse arg., and that of St. Omer, az., biUeU^e, a fesse or ; Rolls 
H. III. and E. II. Roger de Wassingtone (a.d. 1341), on his 
seal displays a shield having the field biUette'e, and charged 
with three swans upon a bend, No. 644, PI. LXXI. The seal 
of Rauf de Bolmer, (Roll R. II.), bears a lion rampt. on a field 
billetUe; and another shield differenced with billets appears in 
the Brass to John Haydon, at Theddlethorpe in Lincolnshire, 



Digitized by Google 



CADE N C Y. 

• «• * # • - * • 



TRV8SBLL 8T AM A N D WAKK 




CMU KTKNAV DK BASCREVILLE DE VI PONT 




CADENCY AND DIFFERENCING. 



195 



a.d. 1424, the principal chaise being a lion passant; No. 411, 
PL XLVIII. 

11. The Roundles of different tinctures that are charged, for 
Difference, upon Bordures and Labels, with other Charges borne 
in the same manner and for the samo purpose, I reserve to be 
exemplified at the close of this chapter, with the Bordures and 
Labels themselves. Roundles borne under other conditions do 
not appear so frequently as might have been expected. The 
shields of Courtenay, Devereux, and Wake, all bear torteaux, 
and are thus blazoned, (Roll H. III.) : Courtenay, or, three tor- 
teaux ; Devereux, arg., a fesse gu., and in chief three torteaux ; 
Wake, or, two bars gu^ and in chief three torteaux ; No. 437, PI. L. 
At Caerlaverock, Hugh de Courtenay, bore an azure label charged 
over his torteaux ; and the shiold thus differenced has become re- 
cognized as the arms of Courtenay, No. 438, PI. L. ; it appears in 
Brasses at Cobham, Exeter, Shillingford, Ac., and frequently at 
Canterbury. Rauf de Camoys bears, or, on a chief gu., three plates, 
(Roll of H. m. and Trotton Brass), Nos. 287, 288, PL XIV. The 
shield of Sir Thomas Latham is, or, on a chief indented az., three 
plates, (Calais Roll, and Arderne Monument at Elford, Stafford- 
shire). The early Rolls contain also tho following shields ; for 
William de Bascrevill, arg., between three hurtes, a chevron gu., 
No. 439, PI. L. ; which Walter de Bascreville differences by 
charging his chevron with golden crosslets ; for Aumery St. 
Amand, or, frettee and on a chief ML, three bezants, No. 436, PI. L. ; 
for Robert de Welle, org., two bendlets gu,, bezantte, No. 435; for 
Sir Warren Trussell, org., frettee gu., the frette bezantee, No. 435 a. 
In the Roll of Henry III., Robert de Estofford bears arg., a 
chevron gu^ bezantee ; No. 434, PI. L. This shield, slightly modi- 
fied, and having on the chevron three bezants only, appears for 
44 Sire Robert de Esstafforde," in the Edw. II. Roll. As the 
fourteenth century advances, this family is known under the 
name of Stafford ; accordingly, in the Roll of Rich. II., 44 Monsr. 
NiroL. de Stafford" bears, or, a cherronel gu., and a chief az. ; and 

o 2 



Digitized by Google 



100 



CADENCY AND DIFFKRKNCINO. 



" Monsr. Robert de Stafford," or, a chev. gu., and over all a bendlet 
az. ; the arms of tho head of the House of De Stafford at this 
period being simply or, a chevron gu., (Calais Roll), which coat 
was quartered by the Dukes of Buckingham in the fifteenth 
century. 

12. Amongst tho early Differencing Charges Annulets occa- 
sionally appear. Thus, John de Vidont bears, gu., six annulets or ,■ 
John de Plessis, org. , six annulds gu., No. 440, PL L. ; and Sir 
William de Avenel, arg., a f esse between six annulets gu.; No. 440 a, 
PI. LX1X. At Kilfano, in Kilkenny, the crossed-legged effigy 
of a De Cadteville has on the shiold four annulets and a canton in 
relief, tho canton being ermine* It is probable that this shield, 
if entirely shown, would have borne six annulets, 3, 2, and 1 ; 
No. 454, PI. XL., represents what is shown of this shield in tho 
original. The Roll of Rich. II. gives the following blazon of the 
shields of Andrew, Jons and Robert de Leyke,— the first, arg^ a 
chief gu., surmounted by a bend engrailed az. ; the second, arg^ on a 
saltire engrailed sa. y nine annulets or ; and the third, arg., a chief 
gu ., surmounted by a bend engrailed az^ in the sin. chief a pierced 
mullet or. A Brass in Merton College Chapel, Oxford, a.d. 1471, 
to Warden Henry Sever, bears two shields, both of which are 
charged with a fesse nebulee between three annulets. In the original 
blazon, tho annulets of De Vipont and De Plessis are described 
as "faux rondlets," or false roundlets—thsX is, as roundlets voided 
of the field. Mascles, in like manner, which appear in several 
early shields in groups, are blazoned as " voydes du champ" when 
they are to be understood to be what wo now distinguish as 
mascles : otherwise the early mascle, when not thus voided, be- 
comes the modern lozenge. Shields mascuUe like those semee of 
annulets or roundles, or shields charged with mascles in con- 
nection with other charges, may have been intended by early 
Heralds to indicate Difference. 

13. Mr. Planciik has directed attontion to the seal of William 
de Romare III., Earl of Lincoln, who died as early as 1108, 



Digitized by GoogI 



CAD K X C V . 




Digitized by Google 



CADENCY AND DIFFERENCING. 



197 



which is both masculee and crusUee. My representation of this 
seal in PI. XLV., is drawn from Mr. Planche's engraving. 
Koger de Quincey, Earl of Winchester, bears, gu. masculee or : 
and this shield, which is blazoned in the Roll of H. III., appears 
upon the seal of the Earl, and also in the *series of early ex- 
amples that yet remain in the south aislo of Westminster Abboy ; 
the mascles, seven in number, are pierced with very small open- 
ings, and disposed over the entire field of the shield, being in 
contact with one another, as in No. 441, PI. XLIX. Tho Roll of 
H. III. also blazons the following shields : for Richard de Rokele, 
erm., masculee gu. ; for William le Blonde, or, masculee sa. ; and 
for John de Neville, gu., masculee or, a canton erm. ; No. 442, PI. L. 
Tho shield of IIubert de Burgh, Earl of Kent, also bears, mas- 
culee voir and gu. — " masculee de verre et de goules ;" but this is 
really lozengy vair and gu., as appears from tho shield that is dis- 
played upon tho seal of tho Earl, and represented in No. 443, 
PI. L. This shield is blazoned in all the earliest Rolls. Robert 
de Tony bears erm., masculee gu.; (anothor shield of Tony or 
Toni is org., a maunche gu.)i John de Rivers, gu., masculee or; 
and William de Ferrers, or, masculee gu., (Caor. Roll). Sir 
Rauf de Ferrers bears this same shield in the Calais Roll ; tho 
shield of Rauf de Gorges (Caer.), is lozengy or and az. The Roll 
II. III. gives one example of an Ordinary that is lozengy, in the 
shield of De Vaux— arg., a bend lozengy gu. and of the field ; No. 
444, PI. L. Tho Brass to John de Creke, about a.d. 1320, at 
Westloy Waterless in Cambridgeshire, affords an early example 
of separate lozenges charged upon an ordinary : this shield bears, 
or, on a fesse gu., three lozenges vair ; No. 445, PI. XLVIII. The 
Brass to Sir Peter Arderne, Chief Baron, at Latton, a.d. 1467, 
gives another good example of lozenges ; one of the shields dis- 
played in this memorial bears, paly of six or and gu., on a chief 
arg. three lozenges of the second, the central lozenge charged with a 
golden chess-rook, No. 448, PI. XL.; another shield upon this 
same Brass bears, arg., a chevron engrailed, between three chess- 



Digitized by Google 



198 CADENCY AND DIFFERENCING. 

rooks m Robert de Ukswike (Roll R. II.) bears, arg., on a bend 
sa., three lozenges of the field, each charged with a saltire gu. A field 
or an Ordinary frettde is, apparently, a modified form of represent- 
ing a surface as lozengy. John de Verdon, (Roll H. III.), bears, or, 
frettee gu. ; but Sir RbBERT de Verdon, (Roll E. II.) bears, " de argent, 
a une crois de azure, frette de or ;" No. 449, PI. XL. In the Calais 
Roll, Sir Thomas Hawkestone bears, arg^a fessegu., frett&amp;e or. 

14. Vair occurs repeatedly in early shields, and it certainly 
bore its part in effecting Difference, by means of varying the 
tincture of any shield or of its charges. Thus, William de 
Fortibus, Earl De Aumale or Albemarle (Roll H. III.), bears, gu., 
a cross patonce vairSe (Roll II. III., and shield at Westminster.) 
Traces of these arms, emblazoned on the dress of Aveline, 
Countess of Lancaster, the Earl's daughter, are yet visible in 
her effigy, aj&gt;. 1 274, at Westminster ; No. 446, PI. L. In the 
same Roll, one De Ferrers bears, vairee org. and az., and another, 
vairSe or and gu. ; and this last shield is repeated for Sir Radf de 
Ferrers, of Chartley, (Calais Roll). Fitz Geoffrey bears, quar- 
terly or and gu., within a bordure vairie ; and De Fitz Rauf bears, 
gu., a fessee vairee; (Roll H. III.) One of the early shields of 
the Beauchamfs is vairte; and Sir William Marmion bears, 
vair, a /esse gu., with a label of three points or ; (Calais Roll). In the 
Roll of H. III., De Monchesney on a golden shield bears throe 
small shields, two and one, each of them vair, with two bars gu., 
No. 447, PI. XLVIII. ; a truly original mode of differencing, 
but one which is at once very clear and very decided. 

I must leave students to seek for other examples of early 
shields, differenced and marked for Cadency, together with ex- 
amples of shields which are charged with other varieties of 
devices and figures for the same purpose. 

The usage of Differencing the Accessories of Shields of Arms, as 
well as the shields themselves, has already been exemplified in 
the achievement of Sir John Daubygne, No. 408, p. 134, and in 
several of the interesting mantlings that are blazoned in the 



Digitized by Google 



C K D K N C Y . 



DK. t'RKMK 



[)E M&lt;H N( IIKSN'EY 




1 



CADENCY AND DIFFERENCING. 



Windsor Garter-Plates; (see Mantling, in Chap. XIII.) Crests, 
Supporters, and Badges are all charged with Differences, pre- 
cisely in the same manner as Mantlings. In the instance of 
Animals, the Marks of Cadency are sometimes charged upon their 
shoulders, or they are semee with them; and sometimes the 
Marks are formed into Collars. The lion crest of Thomas Beau- 
fort, Duke of Dorset, is gorged about the throat with a collar 
compony erm. and az., as the bordure of his shield ; and the lion 
crest of his father, John Beaufort, K.G., Duke of Somerset, has 
a collar company arg. and az. ; No. 451 A, PI. XLI. In like 
manner, the shield of Sir Thomas Lancaster (Calais Roll), bears, 
gu., a lion rampt. guard, or, gorged with a collar of France— a bluo 
collar, that is, charged with three golden fleurs do lys ; No. 451 b, 
PI. LXXII. Collars appear to have been used for differencing 
crests, when the shields were differenced with bordures ; as 
labels were habitually repeated on both crests and shields. 

In the " Boke of St. Alban's," (printed 1480, being a species 
of paraphrase of a part of an earlier treatiso on Heraldry by 
Nicholas Upton, a.d. 1440), the ancient practice of Powdering 
Shields for Difference is described under the title of ** Gerattyng." 
This Gerattyng is defined to include nine figures or charges, 
each of which is said to have been used with a definite and dis- 
tinct signification. The nine figures are crosskls (any small 
crosses), fleurs de lys, roses, primroses (probably quatrefoils), cinque- 
foils, escallops , chapleis, mullets, and crescents. This series, accord- 
ingly, does not include martlets, billets, annulets, or roundles of 
any tincture. Whatever may have been the original intention, 
in actual practice all tracos wero soon lost of any systematic 
Gerattyng for the purpose of Marking Cadency, or otherwise dif- 
ferencing allied and similar shields of arms, so that this Gerattyng 
itself gradually became identified with the development and 
ramifications of armorial bearings. The Crosslets, accordingly, 
and the other charges which once had been assumed for dif- 
ference, having become integral components of heraldic com- 
positions, ceased to be regarded as Marks of Cadency or Dif- 



Digitized by Google 



200 CADENCY AND DIFFERENCING. 

ferences ; except, indeed, when a single crescent, mullet, or other 
figure was still employed to perform tho duties that once had 
devolved on the orle or tho powdered field, and thus would have 
to act alone as a " Difference." Tho term " Gerattyng which it 
does not seem to be desirable to introduce into modern blazon, 
has been very ingeniously derived (through the surprising spell- 
ing and tho perpetual misprints of the " Boko of St. Alban's " 
itself), from ingerata,— a " reading " for ingesta, the participle of 
ingcro, " to pour upon ;"* as tho charges in geratted shields are 
poudrtes, or 8eme*ea— poured over their fields ; (See Herald and 
Genealogist, II., 40.) 

15. Tho idea of differencing by a Single Mark of Cadency or 
Difference, was regarded with favour at an early period. The 
small charges that were oftentimes repeated in shields of arms, 
soon began to be regarded as components of tho blazon : and 
they were regularly transmitted with the Ordinary or other pri- 
mary charge with which they had been associated. Hence a 
single distinct charge of small size for difference, would natu- 
rally appear not desirable merely, but absolutely necessary, in 
order to carry out the system of Cadency and Differencing, under 
tho altered conditions of more matured Heraldry. When brought 
to the tost of experiment, this method of differencing proved to 
be far loss satisfactory than had been expected : on the one hand, 
the single small differencing charge was not found always to tell 
its own proper tale with sufficient distinctness and emphasis, 
while, on the other hand, even this addition to a shield fre- 
quently lost its differencing attributes, and assumed a position 
as a permanent charge. It must be added, that thus method of 
differencing has produced indirectly more of confusion than of 
that clear and authoritative definition, which is tho aim and 
object of all true and consistent Heraldic Difference. 

The silver mullet of the De Veres is one of tho earliest, as it 
is ono of tho best known and most characteristic examples of Dif- 
ferencing by a Single Charge. In the Rolls of H. HI. and E. I., the 
Earl of OXFORD— "£* Comic de Hoxcnfordc" — bears, quarterly gu. 



Digitized by CjOOqIc 



CADENCY AND DIFFERENCING 



201 



and or, in the first quarter a mullet arg., No. 1 56, PI. VI. ; and this 
shield Hugh de Vere, the Earl's son, further differences with 
a bordure indented sa., No. 477, PL XXXII ; Caer. Roll, and Rolls 
of E. I., E. II., E. III. ; see also numerous shields at Canterbury, 
the Hatfield shield, and the De Vere mullets at Earl's Col no, in 
Essex. In the Roll of li. II., Aubry de Vere bears the mullet of 
his house ermine. In the Roll of E. II. (a. d. 1308-14) there 
occur many remarkable examples of Difference marked by a 
single small charge : and the Difference effected by this process 
in the examples contained in this Roll is made the more impres- 
sive, from the circumstanco that the shields of the heads of the 
several families are generally blazoned without the Differences, 
in association with the differenced shields. The differencing 
charges employed in these shields, on investigation, would prove, 
in almost every case, to have been derived from some allied 
shield of arms, and consequently they at once suggest the idea of 
Marshalling. It was evidently a favourite usago with the early 
Heralds to charge these small singlo Differences in prominent 
positions : thus, when a lion was in the blazon of any shield, 
they evidently delighted to chargo the Difference upon his 
shoulder. The examples which follow are from tho Roll of E. II. : 
— Sir Giles de Brewys or Braose : arg., crusilte, a lion rampt. or, 
charged on its shoulder with a fleur de lys gu. Sir Estevene de 
Segrave : sa., a lion rampt. arg., crowned or, on (he shoulder a fleur 
de lys gu., No. 646, PI. LXXII. Sir Nicholas de Estlee : arg., 
a lion rampt. gu., on the shoulder a cinquefoil of the field, No. G47 ; 
Sir Giles de Estlee added to this differenced shield an azure 
label, for further Difference. Sir Richard de Echebastox, arg., a 
lion rampt. gu., on his shoulder a cinque/oil of the field, a label of 
three points az. Sir Philip de Baring ton, in like manner, differ- 
ences with a fleur de lys. Sir Robert de W a l kef are, again, bears 
org., a lion rampt. sa^ charged on the shoulder with a mullet or. Sir John 
de Resoun : gu., a lion rampt. or., tn the dexter chief of the shield a 
cross pattee voir. Mounpynzon, of Norfolk, (whose name has 
sinco been written Mompesson), bears, arg., a lion rampt. sa., on hi* 



202 



CADENCY AND DIFFERENCING. 



shoulder a chaffinch (" un pinzon") or, No. C48, PL LXX1I. Sir 
John de Peche : az., an eagle disp. org., on its breast a maunche gu., 
No. 649, PL, LXXII. Sir Edmond de Pagenham: quarterly or 
and gu., in the first quarter an eagle displayed vert. (Sir William 
Philip, K.G., a.d. 1440, boars, quarterly gu. and arg^ in the first 
quarter an eagle or, No. 650, PI. LXXII., from his Gartor-Plate.) 
Sir John Modnteney : az M on a bend between six martlets or, a mullet 
gu. ; and a second Sir JonN bears the same shield similarly dif- 
ferenced, with a field gules. Sir John de Becue, arg., on a bend 
gu., three stag's heads or, in the dexter chief a martlet sa. Sir Thomas 
de St. Leger : az., fretty arg., on a chief or a mullet gu. Sir 
Edmond de Wellyngtone : gu., a saltire vairee, in chief a mullet or, 
No. 651, PI. LXXT. 

The shield of Sir John De Beauchamp, brother of the Earl 
of Warwick, blazoned in the Calais Roll, is differenced with a 
crescent sa., No. 371, PI. XXV. This shield is blazoned again in 
the Roll of R. II., and with it is the Beauchamp shield with the 
martlets (No. 369, PI. XXV.,) also differenced with &amp; pierced mul- 
let sa. : a sable crescent differences this same shield at Worcester. 
Sir Thomas and Sir Otes or Otho de Holland severally dif- 
ference Holland ancient, No. 637, PI. LXV., with an annulet and a 
crescent gu^ (Calais Roll) : both brothers were Knights Founders 
of the Garter, and they were the second and third sons of Robert 
de Holland and Maud de la Zouche. The Calais Roll also 
blazons the shield of Sir Adam Ashehurste, gu«, a cross engrailed, 
and in the dexter chief a fleur de lys arg. ; and that of Sir Thomas 
Bradstone, org., on a canton gu. a rose or. ; the Roll of E. III. bla- 
zons a cinquefoil instead of a rose on this canton. This shield of 
Bradstone is marshalled in the first quarter of an escutcheon of 
pretence in the Garter-Plate of Sir John Neville, K.G., Lord 
Montagu. In the fourth quarter this same escutcheon bears 
De la Pole, az., on afesse between three leopard's faces or, an annulet 
gu., No. 452 a, PI. XL. ; and, in the second quarter of Sir John's 
own shield is Neville of Salisbury, gu., a saltire org., charged with 
a label of three points cmnponcc arg. and az., No. 452 b. This last 



CADE X C Y 

.SIR T LANCASTER DE SE GRAVE 




. .3 f* LA.'- 



Digitized by Google 



CADENCY AND DIFFERENCING. 203 

shield is several times repeated upon the Beauchamp Monument 
at Warwick. Another Neville, Lord Latymer, charges a pellet 
upon his silver saltire, for difference, No. 452 c, PI. XL. ; and yet 
another peer of the same family, Neville, Lord Behqavenny, dif- 
ferences his saltire with a rose gu. No less than eight other dif- 
ferences of the simple shield of Neville of Baby are found 
to have been assumed to distinguish the various branches of 
that powerful and far-spreading house : thus the entire group of 
these Neville differences are three labels, the crescent, martlet, 

forming a gimmeUring, all of them charged upon the silver sal- 
tire, as in the following shields, No. 452 d. 




No. 452 i&gt;. — Differenced bhioUUi of Neville of Kaby. 



204 



CADENCY AND DIFFERENCING. 



Tho Roll of R. II. gives tho fifth, sixth, and seventh of these 
shields, and it blazons tho mullel as sable pierced : this Roll also 
gives for " Le Sr. do Nevyll," gu., a saltire org., and for *« Mons. 
Robert Nevill," org., a saltire gu., — " the reverse." Other shields 
of Neville that are altogether different, appear in the Rolls of 
II. III., E. I., E. II., and E. III. (See Chap. XXXI.) 

The Beauforts difference with either a MuUcl or a Crescent, in 
addition to their differenced Bordnro, No. 480, PI. XXXII. ; 
and tho Cardinal also charges his Bordure with a Mitre instead 
of tho Crescent, (Seal). From tho Roll of R. II. I select the 
following examples of differencing by a single small charge : — 
George Felbrige: or, a lion rampt. gu., on 
arg., pierced. Roger Faulconbridge: arg., a lion rampt. az., on 
his slioutder a fieur de lys or. Richard Story : arg., a Hon rampt. 
queue fourcheepurp., on his shoulder a cross paitee or. War. Bagot : 
arg., on a chevron gu., between three martlets sa., a crescent of the 
field. Roger Curson : arg., on a bend sa. three popinjays or, col- 
lared and legged gu. ; in tlie sin. chief a crescent of the last. Rauf 
Frkschevill : az., between six escallops, a bend arg., charged in chief 
with a pierced mullet gu. John de Feyton : sa., a cross eng. or, in 
Oie dext. chief a mullet arg. Tho head of the family of Heron 
bears, gu., three herons, two and one, org., beaked and legged or: 
this shield is differenced by Walter Heron and Gerard Heron 
by their severally adding in chief a crosslet or, and an annulet or, 
while William and John Heron add a chevron and a chevron en- 
grailed argent. Upon tho Brass in Westminster Abbey to Sir 
John de Harpedon, a.d. 1451, hit arms are blazoned, arg., a 
mullet gu., pierced of the field and charged with a martlet sa., for 
difference, No. C52, PL LXXII. ; in the Roll of E. II., this shield 
is borne without tho martlet by Sir William de Harpedene. As 
the fifteenth century advances, examples of Cadency marked by 
a Single Small Charge increase in number. Thus, at Childrey, 
in Berkshire, in his Brass, a.d. 1444, the arms of William Fyn- 
derne, repeated both upon shields and upon his tabard, are, arg., 



Digitized by Google 



CADENCY AND DIFFERENCING. 205 

between three crosses pattecs fitcMcs, a chevron sa„ charged for differ- 
ence with an annulet of the field. No. 452, PL XL. Thomas 
Lanoley, Bishop of Durham (a.d. 1406-1437), differences his 
paternal arras, paly of six arg. and vert, with a mullet, (Official 
Seal). Sir John Stanley in 1474, at Elford, upon his monument 
differences his quarterly shield of Stanley aud Lathom with a 
crescent gules. In the Arderne Brass at Latton, one of the 
shields hears De Bohun differenced with a single mullet on the 
hend : and Nicholas Charles gives a seal of Edward de Bohun, 
(without date, hut evidently of the fourteenth century,) which 
hears a shield of Bohun charged with a single lozenge on tho bend. 
Sir Thomas Loyell, K.G. (temp. Henry VII.) bears quarterly, 1 
and 4, arg., a chevron az., between three squirrels seiant gu., a 
crescent, for difference, or; 2 and 3, vert, two chevronels arg.,, each 
charged with three cinquefoih gu. Sir Gilbert Talbot, K.G., 
(temp. Henry VII.), differences his lion crest with a crescent; 
and, in tho third quarter of his shield he marshals Neville of 
Baby, having the saltire charged with a martlet gu. Robert Wil- 
loughby, K.G., Lord Broke (died 1502) differences his first 
grand quarter with a crescent, charged (as in the shield, No. 480, 
of the Beauforts) upon the fesse point. And Henry Stafford 
K.G., Lord Stafford, second son of Henry, second Duke of 
Buckingham (temp. Henry VIII.), also differences his quartered 
shield upon tho fesse point with a crescent; (Garter-Plate). 
And, onco more, about the same period, in a monument of tho 
Verneys at King's Langloy, ^tho Vorney shield is differenced 
with a crescent az. At an earlier period tho samo Verneys dif- 
ference, after the manner thon prevalent, by changing the 
tinctures of their shield and its charges, and by modifying tho 
general character and arrangement of their arms. And again, 
a.d. 1597, Charles Howard, son of William, Lord Howard of 
Effingham, differences Howard ancient with a single mullet sa, on 
the bend : an Ermine spot is also used in tho samo manner by 
other Howards for Difference. 



Digitized by Google 



206 



CADENCY AND DIFFERENCING, 



16. With the exception of Royal Cadency, which now is 
marked exclusively with the label, the Differences of Modern 
Heraldry are the same in their general character as they may be 
considered to havo been since the commencement of the fifteenth 
century. The motive or reason, which might have assigned to 
each of the differencing charges now in use its own particular 
position in tho order of their arrangemont, (if any such motive 
or reason ever existed,) is no longer known ; neither is there 
any ovidenco to show that the present accepted order of arrange- 
ment has been recognized earlier than the sixteenth century. 
These Modern Differences arc for, 

1. Tho eldest son, (during his father's life-time) a Label: 
No. 379 a, PI. XIII. 

2. Tho second son or brother — a Crescent : No. 380. 

3. The third son— a Mullet : No. 381. 

4. The fourth son— a Martlet : No. 382. 

5. Tho fifth son— an Annulet : No. 383. 

6. Tho sixth son— a Fleur de lys : No. 384. 

7. The seventh son — a Rose : No. 385. 

8. Tho eighth son — a Cross Moline : No. 386. 

9. The ninth son— a Double Quatrefoil : No. 387. 

The first son of the first son may charge his label with a 
label, his second son may charge his label with a crescent, and 
so on; and the first son of the second son may charge his 
crescent with a label, &amp;c, &amp;c, though happily this complicated 
and involved differencing is very rarely adopted. All Marks of 
Cadency are now generally borne in the chief of the shield. 
In actual practice in our own times, these differences are rarely 
used by the brothers of the same family during their father's 
life-time, but they are almost universally regarded as tho here- 
ditary Marks of the Junior branches of the same family, and thus in 
some families they are systematically transmitted with the ArmR 
which are differenced by them. Examples may be taken from 



Digitized by Google 



CADENCY AND DIFFERENCING. 



207 



the Peerage, in the Crescent of Cecil, Marquess of Salisbury, and 
of the Earl Stanhope; the Mullet of the Howards, Earls of 
Carlisle and Effingham; the Martlet of Brudenei.l, Earl of 
Cardigan, and of Murray, Lord Elibank ; the Annulet of Bertie, 
Earl of Abingdon ; the Fleur de lys of Wedderburn, Lord Lough- 
borough ; and the Rose of Neville, Earl of Abergavenny. I may 
add, the Arms of the Earl of Eldon, which are differenced with 
a Mullet, to show that they were first borne by the younger of 
the two illustrious legal brothers, William and John Scott, and 
by the third son of their father. In like manner, a Mullet upon 
the shield of the Duke of Wellington shows that the Duke was 
the third son of the Earl of Mornington. 

Daughters, the Princesses excepted since the accession of the 
present Royal Family to the Crown of England, being all equally 
co-heiresses, do not difference their paternal arms ; but when a 
differenced Coat of Anns retains its Difference as a Charge, as 
in the instanco of the Courtenays, such a coat of arras is borne 
by daughters as well as sons. In early Heraldry, however, 
ladies commonly bore their paternal Differences; (see p. 194). 

The Bordure, the Bend, tho Canton, and the Chevron would 
always afford ready facilities for compounding two coats of arms, 
and, with the Label, they might also with ease be added to any 
shield " for difference." And, Cadency and Differencing thus 
effected might as easily receive a secondary series of differences 
— small figures and devices, that is, might be charged either 
upon a label or any of its comrades, thus Differencing them from 
themselves when they wore added uncharged to any Shield of 
Arms. Upon tho same principle, a Clue/ may sometimes have 
first been added to tho shield, and then charged for difference ; 
and again always with a view to differencing, Ordinaries may 
have been cotised ; a Chevron or a Fesse may have been resolved 
into a group of either ehevronels or bars gemelles ; and a Bend 
may have been superseded by a single bendlet or a group of 
bendlets. 



208 



CADENCY AND DIFFERENCING. 



Boforo I enter moro fully upon a consideration of Cadency 
effected by the Label and the Bordure, it may bo desirable to 
adduce a few additional early examples of Shields, which illus- 
trate those other modes of Differencing to which I have just 
referred. 

17. Examples of Cantons or Quarters. Cadency and Differ- 
ence marked by tho Canton may bo regarded, with comparatively 
rare exceptions, as a modified form of Marshalling. The devices 
that are charged upon a Canton, with occasional exceptions only, 
are taken from and represent some allied Coat of Arms. And 
the prevailing usage is, on the one hand, that a man who does 
not quarter his maternal arms should either canton them, or 
charge some significant reference to them upon a Canton, 11 for 
Difference;" or, on the other hand, that the children and heirs 
of an Heiress, who are not also heirs of their father, should bear 
on a Canton their father's arms. It will be borne in mind that 
in the earliest Rolls of Arms a Canton is entitled a 44 Quarter" 

A Canton or Quarter Ermine, apparently derived from the ermine 
shield of John Count of Brittany Earl of Richmond, appears 
differencing the Arms of several early families. Tho Shield of 
John de Dreux himself, Count of Brittany, (No. 116, P1.V., and 
p. 34,) is a most expiossive example of the use of tho Canton. 
The mother of tho Count was a sister of Edward 1. ; he there- 
fore placed about his shield a Bordure of England ; and, as Earl 
of Richmond, he added tho Canton ermine. Robert de Tateshall 
bears, chequfe org. and gu. t a quarter erm. : E. de Boys, org., two 
bars gu.y a quarter erm. : Roll of H. III. Thomas de IIewes, arg., 
a freite gu., a quarter erm. : Philip le Despencer, barry of six or 
and az., a quarter erm. : Rafe Bassett, arg., three piles gu., a quarter 
erm. : Roll of E. III. In tho Calais Roll Sir Symon de Bassett 
bears, or, three piles in point gu., a canton erm., which shield is 
repeated in tho Garter-Plato of Ralph, Lord Bassett, of Drayton, 
who died in 1300, No. 450, PI. XL. In the Calais Roll, R. de 
Bassett bears, or, three pallets gu., a canton erm., No. 4.55, PI. XL. : 



Digitized by Google 



CADENCY. 

CP AT XV 



MK BIGOT I »K HKMKNHAI.K 




D'ARCY D'ARCY. 




Digitized by Google 



CADENCY AND DIFFERENCING. 



(see also Nos. 402, 403, PI. XXXVII.); By comparing these 
two shields, it will be seen that the Basse-its, whilo retaining 
the same ermine canton, differenced three pallets with as many 
piles, both the tincture, and the number, and also the general 
character of the charges being the same in the two shields ; and 
a further comparison with Nos. 402 and 403, will show the 
ermine field which is represented in the Canton, and the tinctures 
or and gules. In the Roll of R. II., again, Sir John Bassett 
bears, with the three piles in point, a canton arg. y charged with a 
griffin segreant m,, armed gu., No. 654, PI. LXXI. " Le Sr. la 
Zowche " (Koll H. II.) boars, gu. bezantee, a canton erm., No. 366 a, 
PI. LXVII, (seo p. 1 74.) The Staffords also, with some other 
families of less note, difference with the samo canton ermine. 
From the Roll of R. II. I obtain one other excellent example, the 
shield of Sir William le Bryan, or, three piles from the chief az., 
a canton paly of four org. and of the second, charged with a bend gu., 
thereon three eaglets disp. gold,— this shield accordingly is Bryan 
differenced with a canton of Grandison. (Sec p. 211.) 

William de Dunstanville bears, org., frettee gu., a canton of 
England — that is, a canton or quarter gu., charged with a lion pass, 
guard, or : and William de Lancaster bears the samo canton on 
a shield arg., charged with two bars gu., No. 453, PI. XL. ; Roll 
II. III. : this samo shield is blazoned for John de Lancaster in 
the Caer. Roll. Again, Sir Thomas Kyriell, K.G. (a.d. 1460), 
bears, or, two chevrons gu., a canton of England ; in this instance 
the Royal Canton was certainly a " Difference by augmentation," 
obtained in acknowledgment for good service done to the House 
of Lancaster: about a century earlier, John Kyriel bears, or, 
three chevronels and a quarter gu. In the Calais Roll, Sir William 
de Warren bears, cheque' e or and az., on a canton gu. a lioncel rampt. 
org. that is, he bears a canton of Fitz-Alan, No. 653, PI. LXXI. 
In the Roll of R. IL, Richard de Kyrkeby bears, arg., two bars 
gu., on a canton of the last a cross moline or. : De ETroN, ba&gt;-ry of 
twelve arg. and gu., a label of three points az., over all a ronton sa. 



Digitized by Google 



210 



CADENCY AND DIFFERENCING 



charged with a cross patonce or : and Avery Britchebury bears, 
arg., two bars az., on a canton of the last a martlet or. The arms Qf 
the Widvilles or Woodvilles are arg. a fesse and a canton gu. 
These arms it is customary to blazon with a fesse and canton 
conjoined ; but the canton certainly ought to be represented as 
raised in relief above the fesse, for a bordure is charged upon a 
fesse, and a canton is charged upon a bordure. The Harfords 
record the alliance of an Ileiress of the Scropes with their house, 
by adding the arms of Scrope, so famous in their severe sim- 
plicity, to their paternal shield. A good example occurs in the 
Brass to Anthony Harford, a.d. 1590, at Colwall in Hereford- 
shire : this shield is thus blazoned, sa., two bends arg., with a 
canton of Scrope , that is, a canton az., charged with a bend or. 

With examples of Cantons I may here notice tho remarkable 
Difference blazoned in the Roll of H. III. for Hugh de Balliol, 
No. 645, PI. LXVII. The shield of 44 John de Baluoll" is 
given as, gu., an orle ("faux escochori') arg.; and for Hugh, his 
son, the same shield, charged in the dexter chief with a small 
shield bearing, az., a lion rampt. arg. crowned or : I may add, for 
Eustace de Balliol, the shield differenced again, " cCazur au fans 
escocheon dor crusule d"or." The Peerage gives characteristic 
examples of shields charged with small shields which are them- 
selves charged, in the arms of tho Cecils, Marquesses of Salis- 
bury and Exeter, who bear, harry often arg. and at., over all six 
escutcheons, three, two, and one, sa., each charged with a lion ramp, of 
the first. 

18. Examples of Bends and Bendlets. The simple Bend as 
borne on the shield of Scrope, would readily suggest the fitness 
of this Ordinary and its Diminutive for Differencing ; and accord- 
ingly in many instances Bends and Bendlets are found to have 
been charged .upon early shields for marking Difference. Roll 
of H. III. : William de Gant, barry of six arg. and az., a bend gu. : 
E. de Kendall, arg., a bend az., cotised vert ; in another Roll of 
the same period this shield is blazoned, arg., a bend cotised in- 



Digitized by Google 



r a r&gt; K x c v 



DE KIT2WILL1AM KI.MKRKH;t;K. 




Digitized by Google 



CADENCY AND DIFFERENCING. 



211 



denied vert ; and in the Roll of E. II., arg., a bend vert, cotised 
indented gu. In a Brass at Long Mel ford, the same blazonry 
appears, but differently tinctured, for a Cloiton, sa., a bend erm., 
cotised indented or. Roll of Caer. : John de Grey, harry of six, 
arg. and az., a bendlet engrailed gu. ; (Compare No. 121, p. 35; 
this shield of De Grey with the barry field, tout without the 
bendlet, is also blazoned in the Caer. Roll.) ; Robert le Fitz- 
Payne, gu., three lions pass, in pale arg., over all a bendlet az. : Wil- 
liam de Grandison, paly of six arg. and az., on a bend gu. three 
eaglets displayed or. The shield of the Grandisons in its original 
simplicity is, paly of six, arg. and az. Upon this a bend gules is 
charged. Next, upon the bend itself three golden eaglets appear ; 
No. 459, PI. XLIX ; (this shield is blazoned in the Roll of 
E. H., and in the Calais Roll). These eaglets are then differ- 
enced by the substitution, first, of three escallops, and subsequently 
of three buckles, all or; and finally, John de Grandison, Bishop 
of Exeter, a.d. 1327-1369, completes the group with his shield, 
having the red bend charged with a silver mitre between two golden 
bueldes; No. 460, PI. XLIX. I must add that, in Harl. MS. 
5827, the shield of Bishop John de Grandison, is blazoned paly 
of six arg. and az., on a bend gu., a mitre between two eaglets or ; 
No. 460 a, PI. TiXXTTT. In the Caer. Roll, John Fitz-Mar- 
maddke bears, gu., a fesse between three popinjays arg. ; but in the 
Roll of Henry III., Robert Fitz-Marmaduke adds to the same 
arras an azure bendlet, as in No. 458, PI. XL. ; which example, 
having the bendlet added, is drawn from the shield of an 
effigy of the time of Edward I., probably the effigy of the 
Caerlaverock Fitz-Marmaduke himself, at Chester-le-Street, 
Durham. 

Roll of E. II. : Sir Henry de Segrave, sa. a lion rampt. arg^ 
crowned or, over all a bendlet gu. ; Sir Symon bears the, bendlet or, 
No. 655, PI. LXVII. ; and Sir Stephen engrails the red bendlet. 
Sir Hogh Wake, Sir Philip Courtenay, and Sir John Gasceline, 
all difference their paternal arms with a bendlet :— thus, Wake, 

/• 2 



Digitized by Google 



212 



CADENCY AND DIFFERENCING. 



or, two bars gu., in chief three totieaux, and over all a bendlet az, ; 
Courtenay, or, three torteaux, over all a bendlet az. ; Gasceline, or, 
hUlettee az., a bendlet gu. ; Sir Simon Lyndeshaye, or, an eagle dis- 
played purp., dcbruised by a bendlet componee arg. and gu. ; Thomas 
DE Garshale, quarterly arg. and sa., on a bend gu. three fleurs de lys 
or. Calais Roll : Sir Nicholas Poynings, barry of six or and vert, 
over all a bend gu. ; Sir Hugh le Despencer charges his sable bend 
with three mullets arg.; and Sir Phiup engrails the bend itself; 
Sir Nicholas Langforde, paly of six or and gu., and over all a 
bend arg. ; Sir Allan Clavering, quarterly or and gu., on a bend m. 
three muUels arg. Roll of R. II. : Thomas de Walsh e, gu., two 
bars gemeUes org., surmounted by a bendlet of the same ; John le 
Strange, gu., two lions pass, in pale arg., a bendlet or, the samo 
arms without the bendlet being given for another JonN le 
Strange; and Robert de Stafford, or, a chevron gu^ surmounted 
by a bendlet az. I add another example from the sculptured 
effigy of a cross-legged knight at Whatton in Nottinghamshire, 
whoso mutilated shield still shows that it originally bore on a 
bend, between six crosslets, three roundles, No. 6,56 ; one more, from 
the bold effigy of a knight of the period of Edward II., from 
Clehongre in Herefordshire, whose shield bears, sculptured with 
extraordinary spirit, barry of six, on a bend three lion's faces, 
No. 657 ; and one from a Brass of the same period at Gorleston 
in Suffolk, in which the knight, a De Bacon, whose ailettes 
are charged with a plain cross, display s on his shield a bend in- 
dented (or dancettce, or perhaps five lozenges conjoined in bend), and 
on a chief two mullets of six points pureed ; No. G58, PI. LXXIII. 

19. Examples of Chiefs. The shield of the Dk Gexkvilles, 
No. 131 a, PI. XIV., already blazoned (ml, three barnacles in pale 
or, and on a chief crm. a demi-lion rampt. issuant gu.), is an ad- 
mirable example; (Roll H. HI). In this same Roll, Robert le 
Bros bears, arg., a saltire and a chief gu. ; Fitz Raldoi.f bears, 
org., the chief of the shield frettie, gu. ; and A. DE Sr. Am and, arg., 
fretty, a chief sa. This last shield in the Caer. Roll is differenced 



Digitized by Google 



C ADEN C Y 



CHAPTER XV 



IXE BArriX. 



D' A1TRYGNF. 



♦18 A 




IW. ORANDISON 



DE GOTRTFNAY 





DK 8 T API. K D ON . 



LE DK SPENCER 





Digitized by Google 



CADENCY AND DIFFERENCING. 



213 



for Aumbry de St. Amand, by having three bezants charged upon 
the chief. De Tateshall, chequee or and gu., a chief erm. ; De 




No. C5C. — Fragment of a Shield at Whatton, Northamptonshire ; (p. 212.) 

Graham, gu., a saliire arg., on a chief or three escallops of the first ; 
No. 409, PI. XXVI II., Caer. Roll. John de Clinton, arg., on a 
chief az. three fleurs de hjs or, Roll E. II. Sir John Strevelyn 
arg., on a chief gu. three buckles, their tongues in fesse, or; Sir Amy as 
Brett gu., in chief a lion of England; Sir Galyon Corder arg., on 
a chief dancettee three crosslets or, Calais Roll. William de Ermine, 
erm., a saltire eng. gu., on a chief of the last a lion of England ; John 
Deverose, arg., on a fesse gu. a mullet or, in chief three tortcaux, 

Roll r. n. 

20. Examples of Chevrons and Bars Gemelles. Roll of 
H. III. : De Meynell, az., three bars gemelles and a chief or ; De 
Monemue, or, three chevronels gu., and over all a fesse az. ; De 
Richmond, gu., two bars gemelles and a chief or ; De Treoos, gu., 
three bars gemelles and in chief a lion jxiss. or. Caer. Roll : Bartho- 
lomew de Badlesmere, arg., a fesse between two bars gemelles gu., 
over all a label of three points az. ; No. 659, PI. LXXIII. De Pache, 
arg., a fesse between two chevrons gu. This aggroupment often 
occurs with several variations in the tinctures. The famous 
Robert de Fitz Walter, a member of the family of the De 
Clares, bears, or, a fesse between t$co chevrons gu. Upon the shield 
and 8urcoat of a knightly effigy of a De L'Isle, (temp. Edw. I.), 



Digitized by Google 



214 



CADENCY AND DIFFERENCING. 



at Rampton in Cambridgeshire, the fesso and the two chevrons 
are sable upon or ; this same shield is blazoned in the Calais Roll, 
which also gives, for Sir William Kydesbye, sa., a fesse or, 
between two cherrons org. The St. Quintins, on a field of gold, 
bear either a single chevron, or two chevrons, or three chevronels of 
the same tincture, always retaining the same chief voire" e ; 
Nos. 461 and 462, PL XXVII.; these shields are drawn from 
the Brasses to the Sr. Quintins at Brandsburton and Harpham in 
Yorkshire. Henry Fitz Hogh bears, az., three chevronels interlaced, 
and a chief or ; John Boteler, az., a chevron between three covered 
cups or ; and Piers de Carew, arg., three bars gemeUcs so. ; Roll 
R. II. 

21. The Bordure would enable the early Herald to mark 
Cadoncy with the utmost distinctness, and yet without infring- 
ing in the slightest degree upon the original composition of the 
shield to bo differenced ; and also, at the same time, in anticipa- 
tion of marshalling arms, it affords ready facilities for incor- 
porating the distinctive insignia of two different shields into a 
single composition. The Bordure of France of John Plantagenet 
of Eltham, (Not 332. PL XIX.), is a fine example of both 
Cadency and Marshalling. The Bordure bezantSe of the Earl 
of Cornwall, the first of the eight bordered shields that are 
blazoned in the Roll of H. III. (No. 194, PL V.), and the Z?or- 
dure of England that surrounds the banner of John de Dreux of 
Brittany, in the Caerlaverock Roll (No. 116, PL V.), are equally 
characteristic examples of Marshalling and Cadency effected by 
the same process. The differenced shields of the Plantagenets, 
Beauforts, Hollands, and Tddors, with their Bordures are 
described in full in the next Chapter : here, I now proceed to 
adduce some examples of shields differenced by Bordures and 
Labels, in addition to those that have been already noticed. 

Examples of Bordures. Roll of Henry III.: — Fitz Geoffrey 
quarterly or and gu., a bordure mirie ; De Montgomery, erm., a 
bordure gu., srmee of horse-shoes or : De Aubeny, or, two chevrons 



Digitized by Google 



» 



CADE ,\ C V . 

chap; sb xv: 




BISHOP LE OESPKNCEIl ABBOT \\liEATHAMHSTKDE 




Digitized by Google 



CADENCY AND DIFFERENCING. 



215 



gu., within a bordure of the last : De Umfhraville, or, a cinque/oil 
gu., within a bordure az. semee of horseshoes or. Caer. Roll : — .John 
de Barr, az., crusily fitchy or, two barbels haurienl addorsed gold, 
within a bordure engrailed gu., No. 329 A, PL XIX. : IIugh DE Vere, 
son of the Earl of Oxford, De Vere, within a bordure indented so. 
(this shield occurs in several Rolls), No. 477, PI. XXXII. : The 
Earl of Lothian, gu., a lion rampt. arg., within a bordure of the 
first, semee of roses of the second, No. 429 a, PL LXXI. Bertram 
De Montbourchier, arg., three pitchers gu., within a bordure so. 
bezantee, (also Roll of E. II. and Seal), No. 464, PL LL Roll 
of E. I.: — Roger L'Estrange, gu., two lions pass, in pale arg., 
within a bordure eng. or, No. 060, PI. LXU. Simon de Lybourn, 
az., six lioncels rampt. arg., within a bordure eng. or. Another Roll 
of E. I. De Ferrers, vairie, a bordure sa. semie of horse-shoes 
arg.: this shield of De Ferrers is more commonly blazoned, 
vairSe or and gu., a bordure az. senile of horse-shoes or, No. 463, 
PI. LI. Roll of E. II. : John de Hastings, or, a maunche gu., 
icithin a bordure of Valence, (" de or, a une maunche de goules od la 
bordure de Valence") No. 661, PI. LXII. ; this is a remarkable 
example of the use of the bordure for marshalling, as a prelude 
to quartering. William de Beauchamp, Beauchamp with martlets, 
within a bordure indented arg. : Thomas de Pickering, arg., a lion 
rampt. sa., within a bordure gu. bezantee; John de Wigtone, sa., 
three mullets and a bordure indented or ; John de Welle, gu^ six 
crescents arg., within a bordure componee or and az. : Nicholas de 
Rivere, vairte arg. and gu., a bordure az. bezantee : Rauf de Koch- 
ford, quarterly or and gu., a bordure sa. bezanlSe, which shield John 
de Rocheford differences by bearing his bordure indented ; Richard 
de Bassett, paly of six or and gu., a bordure az. bezantee; John de 
Westone, arg., a fesse sa., a bordure gu. bezantee; and for Johan 
de Weston, " sun filz," the same shield having the bordure in- 
dented. Calais Roll :— Sir Andrew de Montaitlte, of Messenden, 
az., a lion rampt. arg., a bordure or ; Sir Roger Neville, gu., a 
fesse dancctte arg., a bordure or. Garter-Plates :— Gilbert Lord 



Digitized by Google 



21G 



CADENCY AND DIFFERENCING. 



Talbot, K.G., brother of the Earl of Shrewsbury, gu., a lion 
rampt., within a bordure engrailed or, No. &lt;JC2, PI. LX11. ; John 
Grey, K.G., Earl of Tankerville, gu., a lion rampt., within a bor- 
dure engrailed arg. ; Sir John DB Cornwall, K.G., Lord Fanhope, 
erm., within a bordure sa. bezants, a lion rampt. crowned or, and 
charged for Difference with a mullet arg. No. 433, PI. LI. Roll of 
K. 11. : John Montagu, org., three fusils in fesse gu., a bordure sa. ; 
John Rocheford, quarterly or and gu., a bordure sa. charged with 
eleven bezants ; RaUFF Rocheford, quarterly or and gu., in the sinister 
chief an annulet arg., a bordure sa. charged with ten bezants ; Nichol 
Byllynoe, gu., three fish naiant in pale or, a bordure eng. arg. ; 
Edm. Fitz Hugh, ^m., three lions rampt., two and one, or, a bordure 
eng. arg., ; Rauff Cheyne, gu., four fusils in fesse arg., each charged 
with an escallop sa., a bordure of the second. A remarkable Bordure 
was borno by Henry Courtenay and by his son Edward, the last 
two Earls of Devon of their race. This Henry was the son of 
William Courtenay, (died 1502,) and his wife Catherine Plan- 
tagenet, youngest daughter of Edward IV.; his arms are, 
quarterly, 1, (ho marks his mother's royal rank by placing the 
heraldic insignia which represent her in the first quarter,) 
France Modern and England quarterly, differenced with a Itordure 
quarterly of England and France ; 2 and 3, Courtenay ; 4. Rivers, 
or, a lion rampt. az., armed gu. ; No. G63, PI. LXII. 

When the Constable and Marshal of England pronounced 
sentence (a.d. 1390) in the famous controversy between Richard, 
Lord Scrope of Bolton, and Sir Robert Grosvenor of Cheshire, 
in favour of the claim of Lord Scrope to bear the disputed Arms, 
az., a bend or, the sentence went on to authorize Sir Robert 
Grosvenor to bear the same arms within a bordure argent,— this 
concession being made in consideration of the good presumptive 
evidence that had been adduced in support of his claim : but the 
King finally decided, on an appeal to him, that the arms were 
exclusively those of Sclope, and that they could not be borne 
simply differenced with a bordure by Grosvenor, considering 



&gt; 



Digitized by Google 



CADENCY BORDCKES 

CHAPTER XV 



l.' ESTRANGE L&gt;K HASTINGS 




Digitized by Google 



CADENCY AND DIFFERENCING. 



217 



that u a bordure is not a sufficient difference between two 
strangers in the same kingdom, but only between cousin and 
cousin related by blood." Thus did Richard 11. rule that the 
Bordure is a Mark of Cadency properly so called. 

In tho Heraldry of Scotland, Bordures appear differencing their 
paternal shields on the Seals of Sir Andrew Murray, (a.d. 1292), 
Hugh Fraser (1377), and Patrick Hepburn (1371) : the first of 
these Bordures is charged with eleven roses, the second with nine 
mullets, and the third is simply engrailed : (Seton's Scottish He- 
raldry, p. 196). Maule, Earl of Panmure; per pale arg. and gu., 
on a bordure also per pale eiglU escallops, all countercharged. Again, 
" when Hamilton of Innerwick, the earliest Cadet of the House 
of Hamilton, married the daughter and heiress of Stewart of 
Cruxton, he placed a fess checquy between his three paternal 
cinquefoils, which figures wero afterwards surrounded by a 
bordure charged with eight buckles for De Glay of Innerwick, in 
consequence of another alliance :" {Scottish Heraldry, p. 110.) 

The Bordure was frequently used by Prelates for differencing 
their arms. Thus, Glover gives the following amongst other 
examples: — William Courtenay, Archbishop of Canterbury, 
a.d. 138 1-1 390, or, (Jiree tortcaux, on a label of three points az. as 
many mitres arg., No. 664, PI. LXXIIl. ; and these arms tho 
Archbishop bears impaled by those of the See of Canterbury. 
Thomas Fitz-Alan or Arundel, Archbishop Cantuar., a.d. 1396- 
1414, (son of Robert Fitz-Alan, thirteenth Earl of Arundel), 
Fitz-Alan and Warrenne quarterly, within a bordure engrailed arg. 
John Stafford, Archbishop Cantuar., a.d. 1443-1452, or, on a 
chevron gu. a mitre org., the whole within a bordure sa. Walter de 
Stapledon, Bishop of Exeter, a.d. 1306-1329, org., two bendlets 
nebuUe sa., within a bordure of (lie second charged with eight keys, or, 
No. 665, PL LXXLII. ; Bishop Stapledon's bordure is sometimes 
blazoned gules and sometimes azure, as at Exeter College, Oxford. 
Edmund de Stafford, Bishop Exeter, a.d. 1394-1419, or, a chevron 
gu., within a bordure of the second, charged with eight mitres org., 



Digitized by Google 



218 



CADENCY AND DIFFERENCING. 



(sometimes the mitres are or). Henry Le Despencer, Bishop 
Norwich, a.d. 1370-1400, Le Despencer (No. 107), within a bordure 
az. t charged with fifteen mitres or &gt; No. 465, PL LI. : this shield is 
thus blazoned on a boss in roof of the south aisle of the Church 
of Great Yarmouth ; and it also appears with several archiepis- 
copal shields of the Metropolitan See, in the remarkable series 
of heraldic bosses at Canterbury. In his official seal, Bishop 
Henry Le Despencer has the shield of the see of Norwich on tho 
dexter side of his effigy, and on the sinister side his differenced 
shield of Le Despencer. The personal seal of this Bishop is a 
most interesting example of heraldic composition. From a 
helm and mantling surmounted by a mitre and tho Le Despencer 
crest — a griffin's head, the shield of the prelate, hangs by its 
sinister angle : it is charged with the Le Despencer arms within 
a bordure, upon which are eight mitres. On either side of the 
helm is a shield : the one to tho dexter bears the arms of the 
See of Norwich — az. } three mitres or : while the sinister shield is 
charged with seven mascles. The bordure in this seal having 
the number of the mitres reduced from fifteen to eight, exem- 
plifies the heraldic feeling of the time which held the number 
of the repetitions of the differencing charges of any shield to be 
a matter of indifference ; No. G66, PI. LXXIII. At St Alban's 
in the north aisle, there remains in the 6tained glass a shield 
of Abbot John de Wheathampstede, a.d. 1421-1460, which may 
be said to bear the arms of the Abbey within a bordure of the 
Abbot,— az., a saltire or, within a bordure gu., charged with eight 
garbs of the second ; No. 466, PI. LI. : see also No. 201 a, PL XV. 

I may here notice, as a singular illustration of the prevalence 
of what may be styled the heraldic sentiment of the thirteenth 
and fourteenth centuries, tbat the Bishops of that day sometimes 
blazoned their paternal arms upon their official vestments. Thus, 
upon the seal of Anthony Bec, the celebrated Bishop of Durham, 
a.d. 1283-1310, the effigy of the Prelate is vested in a chesubl© 
charged with his cross recerccUe ; and Lewis de Beaumont, Bishop 



Digitized by Google 



CADENCY AND DIFFERENCING. 



219 



of the same See (a.d. 1317-1333), appears upon his Seal having 
his chesuble semie de-lys and charged with a lion rampt. (See 
PI. XXVIII., No. 427). This episcopal effigy stands between 
two shields, that to the dexter bearing England, while the other 
would seem to be a modification of the arms of Jerusalem (No. 1, 
p. 8) ; it is charged with a cross potent, between four groups of small 
crosses patties, three crosses in each group.* 

22. Cadency marked by the Label. The earliest known Label 
appears upon the counter-seal of Saer de Qotncey, first Earl of 
"Winchester, one of the Magna Charta Barons, who died in 1219 : 
his arms are, or, a fesse gu., in chief a label of many points — their 
exact number, which probably is twelve, it is not easy to deter- 
mine ; nor can it be certainly demonstrated that this label was 
borne as a Mark of Cadency, and yet Saer was certainly the 
younger brother of Robert de Quincfa'. 

In 1235, John de Laci, Earl of Lincoln, displays upon his 
counter-seal a label of four points, over a bendlet, No. 33 b, p. 25. 
In "Westminster Abbey, one of the shields emblazoned by the 
Heralds of either Henry III. or Edward I., bears the same arms 
of the Earl of Lincoln ; the shield is quarterly or and gu. ; but the 
black bendlet, which is very narrow, is a bendlet sinister, and the 
label is set very high in the shield, and there is also a narrow 
border, raised and tinctured sable, No. 467, Fl. XLIX. During 
the lifetime of his father, Edward I. charged his shield upon 
his seal with a label, as the recognized heraldic Difference which 
should distinguish his own shield as the Frince Royal of Eng- 
land, from the shield of the King his father. Frince Edward's 
label is so placed as to form the actual chief of the escutcheon, and 
two of its five points lie alternately over and under the tail of 
the uppermost lion, No. 470, p. 173. Edward FT., whilo Prince 
Royal, bore the label set lower on the shield and with longer 

* Even now, ecclesiastics of the Roman Church sometimes blnzon their arms 
upon their vestments, as appears from a photograph portrait of the present 
Popo, Pits IX., in which the stole is charged with the paternal arms of the 
Pontiff. 



220 



CADENCY AND DIFFERENCING 



points, No. 430, PI. XLV. This label of Prince Edward is 
blazoned azure in the Roll of Caerlaverock, and in the Roll of 

II. III., his father's label has the same tincture. It will be 
borne in remembrance that labels, when they were first intro- 
duced, were borne as well by younger brothers as by sons in 
their father's lifetime ; and also tliat at an early period in the 
history of heraldry labels became hereditary, as in the instance 

Of the COURTENAYS. 

The early labels wore always blazoned in a conspicuous 
manner ; and, when they had not their tincturo determined by 
any special circumstances, they were tinctured in such colours 
as might contrast most effectively with the blazonry of the 
shields upon which they were charged. These early labels are 
found always to extend across the entire field of the shield from 
dexter to sinister ; they have the ribbon itself very narrow, and 
it is generally set in close proximity to the uppermost margin 
of the shield, as in the examples upon the monuments of Edward 

III. and Edmond of Langley. The points, which are broader 
(sometimes considerably broader) than the horizontal ribbon, are 
in almost all cases either five or three in number ; but a few 
examples of early labels having four points have been observed. 
The secrotum of John de Laci, Earl of Lincoln, a.d. 1232-1258, 
has the label of four points, No. 33 b, p. 25. In like manner, 
upon his magnificent monument in Westminster Abbey, Edmond 
Crouciiback, first Earl of Lancaster, displays a label of four points : 
this Earl, however, and his eldest son also, in their seals bear 
labels of both five and three points. (See Label, in Chap. VII., 
and also in Chap. XXXII.) 

An early seal of one of the Nevilles, No. 667, Chap. XXXI., has 
tho label of four points charged upon the chief of the shield : but 
another Robert de Neville, about a.d. 1270, bears his label of 
five points, as in No. 668. It does not appear that any peculiar 
significancy is attached to tho number of these " points at any 
rate, labels of five and of three points wore certainly borno by 



Digitized by Google 



CADENCY AND DIFFERENCING. 



221 



the same individual at the same time, and they are even charged 
upon the obverse and the reverse of the same seal. The seal and 
the counter-seal of Edward II., as Prince Royal, for example, 
have severally labels of three and Jive points : and Henry Plan* 
tagenet of Bolingbroko displays, on his impaled shield, a label of 
fivepoints awl a label of three points side by side, No. 347, p. 165. 

The Charges with which labels are constantly differenced are 
always intended to convey some significant meaning of their 
own, and thus they tako an important part in giving an historical 
character to heraldic compositions. These charges, necessarily 
drawn to a very small scale, are placed upon the points of any 
label ; sometimes a single charge appears upon one point only, 
at other times it appears upon each point, but more frequently 
tho charge is repeated so that the same device is generally repre- 
sented throe times upon each point. This arrangement, however, 
is loft entirely to the discretion of the artist, there being no 
heraldic signification implied in the repetition of the charges ; 
when they are repeated, the object is to establish moro decidedly 
the character of these small differencing charges, and to render 
their presence more conspicuous. The small figures are almost 
invariably all drawn to the same scale, and placed one above 
another ; but, at St. Alban's there is a shield in stained glass of 
France Ancient and England quarterly, differenced with a label of 
three points having on each point three ermine spots, which are ar- 
ranged two and one, each of tho singlo spots, being much larger 
than the pair of spots above them ; No. 4G8, PI. XXXI. In this 
example, and in several others also, I have not considered it to 
be necessary to engrave more than the label with its charges, 
the shields always being repetitions of either England, France 
Ancient and England, or France Modern and England. 

Labels charged with three ermine spots, three fletirs de lys, &amp;c, 
placed in pale on each of tho points, are of common occurrence ; 
and this, indeed, is always implied, unless some other arrange- 
ment should be expressly specified. Two of tho Plantagenet 



Digitized by Google 



222 



CADENCY AND DIFFERENCING. 



Shields at Great Yarmouth have two ermine spots only on each 
point of their labels, and a third shield has two torteaux only on 
each point, Nos. 469 and 472, PI. XXXI. : and, in like manner, 
one of the shields on the Bnrghersh monument has its label 
charged on each point with two fleurs de lys, and another with 
two ermine spots, while a third has a single red cross upon each point ; 
PI. XXXIV. Upon the Stall-Plate of George Plantagenet, 
K.G., brother of Edward IV., his label is blazoned with a single 
canton upon each of its three points : and this same label is re- 
peated in the stained glass at St. Albans, No. 473, PI. XXXI.: 
and again, Richard Plantagenet, second son of Edward IV., 
upon his Stall-Plate charges a single red canton upon the first point 
only of his silver label, No. 474. I may add here, that during his 
father's lifetime, Richard II. differences his shield with a silver 
label of either five or three points, charged on the central point only 
with a Cross of St. George, No. 485. Occasionally two distinct 
groups of differencing charges appear upon the same label ; in 
this case the label has five points, and it either divides its cen- 
tral point per pale, or allots two points to one group of charges 
and three to the other; thus, on the monument at King's 
Langley, the shield that stands last of the series on the south 
side bears, France Ancient and England quarterly, with a label of 
five points per pale of Brittany and of France; points 1 and 2, 
ermine (three spots on each) ; and points 3, 4, 5, of France (three 
fleurs de lys on each), No. 486. The Stall-Plato of John Plan- 
tagenet, son of Henry IV., is differenced with a similar label, 
charged upon France Modern and England quarterly. Leaving the 
differenced Arms of the Tlantagenet Princes for more full consi- 
deration in the following Chapter, I now proceed to notice some 
examples of labels borne upon shields that are not of Royal 
rank. 

In one Roll of Henry III., thirteen shields are differenced 
with labels of five points ; of these labels six are azure, five are 
gules, and there is one of each of the metals. A second Roll of 



Digitized by Google 



CADENCY— LABELS 

CHAPiER X/ 





o 




o 




o 




M 








o 




0 




o 




a 




s 




o 




o 




o 




i 




1 




*71 



a, 







* 

« 




&lt;* 
» 


la 





. 71 





© 




• 23 &lt;3 



© £3&gt; 



?:*t«Lxxr/ 



Digitized by Google 



CADENCY AND DIFFERENCING. 223 

the same period has fifteen labels of fire points; one or, one 
argent, seven azure, five gules and one sable. There are five 
banners or shields differenced with azure labels of five points in 
the Caerlaverock Roll; one with a similar label vert, and one 
sable; one azure, and one gules of three points; and a third of 
three points, of France. The Calais Roll, which blazons one 
hundred and eighteen shields, has twelve labels ; two only are 
of five points, and of these one is argent, and the other of France ; 
two, of three points, are or, one is argent, four are azure, one is 
gules, a fifth azure label is charged with nine silver crescents, and 
a second golden label bears on each point an eaglet vert. In about 
the same proportion to the numbers of the shields blazoned in 
other Rolls, are the numbers and also the varieties of the labels 
that appear in them to mark cadency. 

Examples of Labels. Roll of H. III. : De Laci, Earl of Lincoln, 
quarterly or and gu., a bend sa., over all a label of five points vert 
(compare No. 33 b, p. 25) ; Eustace de Tours, gu., an orle and a 
label of five points or ; William de Clare, or, three chevronels gu., a 
label of five points az. ; J. le Strange, gu., two lions pass, in pale arg., 
a label of five points az. ; E. de Longespee, az., six lioncels rampt., 
three, two and one, or, a label of five points gu. Roll of E. I. : Sir 
John Louell or Lovel, barry nebuUe of six or and gu., on a label of 
five points az., fifteen mullets arg. No. 502, PI. XXXIII. (Compare 
No. 670, H. LXXIV.) Roll of Caer.: John de Segravk (eldest 
son), sa., a lion ramp, arg., crowned or, and a label of five points gu. ; 
John de St. John (the heir), his father's arms, arg., on a chief gu. 
two mullets pierced or, with a label of five points az., No. 404, PI. 
XXVIII. ; John Chaverjng, son and heir of Robert Fitz Roger, 
quarterly or and gu., a bend sa., over all a label office points vert ; Ed- 
won d de Hastings, brother of the Earl, or, a maunche gu., and a 
lalwl of five points sa. ; Maurice de Berkeley had, upon his fathor's 
banner, " a label of azure because his fatlier teas living See No. 392, 
PI. XXXVII. ; and Patrick of Dunbar, son of the Earl of Lothian, 
a label of fire points az. t charged upon a banner otherwise identical 



Digitized by Google 



224 CADENCY AND DIFFERENCING. 

with that of his father. See No. 429, PI. XXXII., and No. 420 a, 
PL LXXI., and p. 193. Roll of E. II.: Sir John Daubeny, gu., 
a fesse indented (or five fusils conjoined in /esse) erm., in chief tiiree 
mullets or, over all a label of three points az. Sir Hugh Audele, gu., 
frettee or, a label az. ; Sir James Audele, gu., frettee or, a label of 
Longespfa (on each point of the azure label alioncel or)— his mother 
was a daughter of William de Longespee, No. 060, PL LXXIV. 
Sir William Lovel, undee or and gu., a label of Valence (the points 
barrtdee arg. and az., and on each a martlet gu.) ; No. 670, PL 
LXXIV. Sir Richard de la Vacua, gu., three lioncels arg., a label 
of Warrennc, (chequee or and az.); No. 671, PL LXXIV. Sir 
John Texdringe, az., a fesse between two chevrons or, a label gu., 
fleurcttee arg., No. 672, PI. LXXIV. ; Sir William de Suleve, or, 
two bends gu., a label barrtdee arg. and az. ; Sir Robert Peche, arg. 
a fesse between two chevrons gu., a label az. bezant ec. Roll of E. III. : 
James d'Audeley, gu., afrette or, a label componee az. and arg. ; his 
cousin bears the same arms, substituting for the label a bordure 
arg. ; and Hugh, the head of the family, bears the frette without 
any difference. Richard de Grey 11 de Sandiacre," differences 
De Grey, No. 1 21, p. 35, with a lal&gt;elgu. bezatdee ; and Byron, in like 
manner, No. 249, p. 77, is differenced with a label az. ; Hugh and 
Robert de Menell bear, rairee arg. and sa., a bendlet gu., the one 
adding a label gu., and the other a label componee erm. and gu. ; 
and Edward Chandos bears, arg., a pile gu., a label az. Calais 
Roll : Sir Edward de Montague, erm., three fusils conjoined in fesse 
gu., a label of three points or, charged on each point with an eaglet 
vert ; Thomas Clynton (also in Roll of R. II.), arg. on a chief 
az., two mullets of six points or pierced gu., over all a label of three 
points erm., No. 400 a, PL LXVII. (See p. 184, and No. 400, 
PL XXXVII.) 

Roll of R. II. This Roll records the cadency of no less than 
seven members of the family of Scrope, with the memorable 
shield of the head of tho house, Richard ee Scrope, az., a bend or, 
borne by him without any difference. This same shield Henry, 



Digitized by Google 



CADENCY AND DIFFERENCING 



225 



William, and John le Scrope severally difference with labels of 
three points argent, gules and ermine; a second Henry, bears, on a 
label of three points org., as many bars gu. Thomas le Sciiope charges a 



single annulet sa. upon his silcer label ; whilo Stephen and another 
kinsman, whoso Christian name is not recorded, charge, the ono 
a lozenge erm., and the other a muUet erm., in chief upon the Ordi- 
nary of their shields : a Eoll of E. III. adds, for " Monsire Wil- 
liam le Scrope, (Casure, unc bend d'or en le point de la bend un lyon 
rampant de pourpre." I return to the Labels of the Roll of B. £L : 
William Marny bears, gu., a lion rampt. guard org., a label of 
three points or. Eeynald Lucy, gu., semee of crosslets, three lucies 
haurient, two and one t or, a label of three points az. Thomas de 
Asteley, az. a cinquefoil erm., a label of three points or, charged 
with two bars gu. John de Aylesbury, az., a cross arg. ; and 
Thomas, his son, the same, differenced with a label gu. John 
Clavering, quarterly or and gu, a label of three points arg. ; and De 
Etton, barry of twelve arg. and gu., a label of three points az., over 
all a canton sa. charged with a cross patonce or. 

Sir Alexander Giffard, the friend and companion in arras of 
Earl William Longespee, whose noble effigy lies, crossed-lcgged. 
in the fine church of Boy ton in Wiltshire, bears, gu., three Horn 
pass, in pale arg., a label of Jive points az., charged on each point with 
two ficurs de lys or. This shield, No. 503 a, PI. LXXA, is blazoned 
in the glass of the south-east window. The other chosen comrade 




No. 603.— Shield of Sir Emv. de Montaoie. 



Q 



Digitized by Google 



226 



CADENCY AND DIFFERENCING. 



of the Earl of Salisbury, Sir Robert de Verb, his banner-bearer in 
the Crusade, is commemorated by an equally characteristic effigy, 
also representing the good knight crossed-legged, at Sudborough, 
in the same county of Wilts. The label componee arg. and az. of 
the Nevilles, Earls of Salisbury, I have already alluded to 
(p. 203), No. 452 c, PL XL. John Bourchier, K.G., Lord Ber- 
neks, a.d. 1475 (Garter-Plate), over Bourchier and Lorraine quar- 
terly, in the first and fourth grand quarters of his shield, has a label 
of three points of England, that is, a label gu., charged on each point 
with three lions of England ; No. 673, PL LXXI V. This nobleman 
became Lord Berners, jure uxoris, having married the heiress, 
Margery Berners, whose arms (quarterly or and vert) appear in 
the 2nd and 3rd quarters of his shield. His father's mother was 
Alianore de Lorraine, in whose right he quarters Lorraine (gu., 
billettee or, a fesse arg.), with Bourchier. His own mother was 
Anne Plantagenet, daughter of Thomas of Woodstock, youngest 
son of Edward III.; and hence, in reforenco to his maternal 
descent from Edward III., he bears his Label of England. At 
Canterbury, his shield in the 4th quarter bears Bourchier only, 
without any label. William Bourchier, Baron Fitz-Waryn, 
brother of Lord Berners, differences Bourchier with a Label of 
France, also to denote his descent from Edward III. Henry 
Bourchier, K.G., the eldest brother, who married Isabella 
Plantagenet, daughter of George, Duke of Clarence, was cre- 
ated Earl of Essex and Eu, and bears his paternal arms without 
difference. 

TnE Courtenays in their arms have a series of Labels of sin- 
gular interest, from which I select a group of examples. John 
de Courtenay (Roll H. III.) bears, or, three torteaux. Hugh de 
Courtenay (Caer. Roll), bears, or, three torteaux, a label of five 
points az.; and from this time tho Courtenay shield is always 
charged with a label. This Hugh de Courtenay, the eldest son 
of another Hugh de Courtenay and of Alianore Le Dest-enger, 
was created Earl of Devon, and married Agnes de St. John. His 



Digitized by Google 



CADENCY AND DIFFER ENCI NO. 



227 



eldest son, Hugh de Courtenay, second Earl of Devon, bears the 
uncharged azure label, as it had been borne by his father ; he 
married Margaret de Bohun, granddaughter of Edward I. 
This impaled shield appears^ the Brass at Exeter. The second 
son of the first Earl, Egbert de Courtenay, bears an azure label 
charged with nine golden mullets ; his mother, it will be reraem- 
^ bered, was a St. John (See No. 404 a, PL XXVIII.). Sir Hugh, 
K.G., the eldest son of the second Earl, died in his father's life- 
time, having married Elizabeth de Bryan ; he differences with 
a label sa., bezantte. His only son and heir, Hugh, married 
Matilda de Holland of Exeter, and he differences with a label 
of France, az., fleuretUe ; No. 674, PI. LXXIV. (See No. 477 a, 
PI. LXV. : and see pp. 166, 195.) 

Edward de Courtenay, second son of the second Earl, suc- 
ceeded his father as third Earl of Devon ; he died in 1419, 
having married Maud de Camoys. His son, Edward, bears 
an azure label of three points, each point charged with a plate; 
(See No. 287, PI. XIV.). 

Sir Hugh de Courtenay, third (but second surviving) son of 
the second Earl, bears a label of three points az., charged with nine 
crescents arg. ; No. 504, PL XXXIII. (Calais Boll). His son, 
Sir Edward, bears, a label of three points az., charged with nine 
mullets pierced or ; No. 506, PI. XXXIII. ; (Brass at Christchurch 
Cathedral, Oxford, about a.d. 1440). 

Tho aTms of William de Courtenay, Archbishop of Canter- 
bury, fourth son of the second Earl, have been already blazoned ; 
(No. 664, PI. LXXIII. ; and p 217.) 

Sir Philip, fifth son of the second Earl, bears a label of three 
points az.,platt£e (nine plates) ; No. 505, PI. XXXIII.; he married 
Mabgaret Wake, and is the direct ancestor of the present Cour- 
tenays. His son, Sir William, charges his silver label with three 
torteaux (See No. 437, PI. L.). 

Sir Peter de Courtenay, K.G., youngest son of the second 
Earl of Devon, differences his shield with a label of three points 

Q 2 



Digitized by Google 



228 



CADENCY AND DIFFERENCING. 



sa., charged with nine annulets arg. ; No. G75, PL LXXIV. (Garter- 
Tlate ; and Brass in Exeter Cathedral.) 

Another Courtenay label is, az., guttte (Tor; and the sons of 
Thomas, fifth Earl of Devon, who Married Margaret de Beau- 
fort, difference with a label and a bctuUet componee arg. and az. 
(Seo No. 479, PL XXXII. : see also Canterbury shields; Harl. 
M.S. 1366 ; Seals ; Roll of R. II., &amp;c.) 

The Latymers have another small group of Labels, which they 
charge as distinct marks of cadency upon the same shield. "Wil- 
liam le Latymer (Caor. Roll), bears, gu. a cross patonce or. In 
the Roll of E. II., another William le Latymer differences 
this shield (his cross is blazoned pattk), with a label of three points 
sable, platte'e ; No. 507 ; and his brother, Thomas, has his label, 
also of three points, az., fieurcttee ; No. 508. A third Latymer 
label is sable uncharged. The Roll of R. II. gives for Thomas 
Latymer a plain label az. ; and two other members of the family 
difference by charging either five escallops sable, or five martlets 
gxdes upon their cross. 




No. 507. No. 508. 

Arms of William and Thomas LB Latymeu. 



Thomas Grey, K.G., Marquess of Dorset (son of Elizabeth 
Widville), bears De Grey (No. 121, p. 35), differenced with 
three torteaux in chief, and a table of three points erm. ; and his son, 
Thomas, also bears the same arms. 

A singular Label is assigned to Gaston dk Foix, K.G., Count 
of Lonoueville, Captal De Buck, and also to John de Foix, K.G., 



CADENCY AND DIFFERENCING 



220 



Viscount do Chastilion, Captal De Bucii and Earl of Kendall. 
The arms of both are given as, quarterly, 1 and 4, De Foix, or, 
three pallets gu, ; 2 and 3, Beam, az., three garbs or ; and these 
shields are differenced with a label having, instead of points, 
three crosses sable depending from it, each cross being charged 
with five escallops arg. (Ashmole). This label, No. 67b\ PL 
^LXXIV., commemorates the marriage of Blanche de Foix with 
John de Greilly, Captal De Buch, a.d. 1328, whose arms are, 
or , on a cross sa.,fice escallops arg. 

23. Difference by Augmentation. This most interesting sys- 
tem of Differencing, which, in almost every individual instance 
of its application, is directly associated with History, I have re- 
served for separate treatment in Chapter XXVIII., Section I. 




No. 725. — MOLE8WQRTH— No. 72G. — Astley — 

Baronet, a.d. 1G89. Baron Hastings. 




No. 727. 

Haki'kh Crewe — Baronet, a.d. 1620. 
(See Chap. XXXI.) 



Digitized by Google 



No. 407 — Shield of Henky V., as Prince of Wales, from his Sfcdl-Phite in 

St. Geobge's Chapel, Windsor. 



CHAPTER XVI. 

ROYAL CADENCY. 

In this Chapter I have considered the Marks of Cadency which 
distinguish the shields of arms of the Plant ag en et and Tudor 
Princes, with thoso of the De Beauforts and the De Hollands, 
and also the Differences borne by the members of our own Royal 
Family at tho present day. 

I. The Cadency of the Plant agenets. 

The surname of Plantagenet probably was formally adopted 
and recognized about tho close of the fourteenth century. I 
apply it, however, not only to Edward HI. himself, and to his 
descendants, but also to his predecessors and other relatives who 
lived nearer to the time of Henry II., in order to distinguish, by 
a single well-known family name, all the direct male descendants 
of the same Royal House. 



Digitized by Google 



ROYAL CADENCY. 



23 J 



The Names and principal Titles of the Princes of this House 
of Plant ag en et are : — 

1. King Henry II. 

Tliefour sons of King Henry II. 

2. Henry, Duke of Normandy. 

3. King Richard I. 

4. Geoffrey, Count of Brittany. 

5. King Jonx. 

Tfie only son of Count Geoffrey (No. 4) :— 

6. Arthur, Prince Royal. 

77ie two sons of King John (No. 5.) : — 

7. King Henry III. 

8. Richard, Earl of Cornwall, and King of the Romans. 

77mj two sons of King Henry III. (No. 7) :— 

9. King Edward I. 

10. Edmond, m Crouchback," first Earl of Lancaster. 

Tlie three sons of Earl Richard (No. 8) :— 

11. Henry, of Cornwall. 

12. Richard, of Cornwall. 

13. Edmond, second Earl of Cornwall. 

The three sons of King Edward I. (No. 9) :— 

14. King Edward II. 

15. Thomas, "De Brotherton," Earl of Norfolk. 

16. Edmond, " De Wodestock," first Earl of Kent, 

The two sons of King Edward II. (No. 14) 

17. King Edward III. 

18. John, "of Eltham," Bail of Cornwall. 



Digitized by Google 



232 



ItOYAL CADENCY. 



The six sons of King Edward III. (No. 17) : — 

19. Edward, K.G., "the Black Prince," first Prince of Wales, 
Duke of Cornwall and Earl of Chester. 

20. William, "of Hatfield." 

21. Lionel, K.G., 44 of Antwerp," Duke of Clarence. 

22. John, K.G., 44 of Ghent," Earl of Derby, second Duko of 
Lancaster. 

23. Edmond, K.G., "of Langlcy," first Earl of Cambridge, 
and Duko of York. 

24. Thomas, K.G., " of Woodstock," Earl of Buckingham and 
Hereford, Duke of Gloucester. 

The two sons of Edmond, first Earl of Lancaster (No. 10) : — 

25. Thomas, second Earl of Lancaster. 

26. Henry, third Earl of Lancaster. 

The only son of Henry, third Earl of Lancaster (No. 20) : ~ 

27. Henry, first Duko of Lancaster. 

Tfie only son of Thomas, Earl of Norfolk (No. 15) :— 

28. Edward, of Norfolk. 

TIw two sons of Edmond, first Earl of Kent (No. 10) :— 

29. Edmond, second Earl of Kent. 

30. John, third Earl of Kent. 

Ttic two sons of Edward, tlie Black Prince (No. 10) :— 

31. Edward, " of Angouleme." 

32. King Richard II., second Prince of W T alos. 

The only son (by Mary de Bohun) of John, 44 of Qhent? (No. 
22):- 

33. King Henry IV., " of Bolingbroke." 



ROYAL CADENCY. 



233 



The two sons of Edmond " of Langley" (No. 23) : — 

34. Edward, K.G., Earl of Rutland, second Duko of York. 

35. Richard, 44 of Coningsburgh," second Earl of Cambridge 

The only son of Thomas, 44 of Woodstock," (No. 24) :— 

36. Humphrey. 

Tlie four sons of King Henry IV., (No. 33) :— 

37. King Henry V., third Princo of Walos. 

38. Thomas, K.G., second Duke of Clarence. 

30. John, K.G., Duko of Bedford, Earl of Richmond. 

40. Humphrey, K.G., second Duke of Gloucester. 

The only son of Richard, 44 of Coningsburgh" (No. 35) : — 

41. Richard, K.G., third Duko of York, Earl of Cambridge 
and Rutland. 

The only son of King Henry V., (No. 37) :— 

42. King Henry VI. 

The four sons of Richard, third Duke of York, (No. 41) : — 

43. King Edward IV., fourth Duke of York. 

44. Edmond, third Earl of Rutland. 

45. George, K.G., third Duke of Clarence. 

46. King Richard III., third Duko of Gloucester. 

The only son of King Henry VI., (No. 42) : — 

47. Edward, K.G., fourth Prince of Wales. 

Tlte three sons of King Edward IV., (No. 43) : — 

48. King Edward V., fifth Prince of Wales. 

49. Richard, K.G., fifth Duko of York, &amp;c. 

50. Georoe, second Duke of Bedford. 

Tfie only son of King Richard III., (No. 40) . — 

51. Edward, sixth Prince of Wales. 



Digitized by Google 



234 ROYAL CADENCY. 

Ttie only »&lt;m of Geokge, third Duke of Clarence, (No. 45) : — 
52. Edward, Earl of Warwick, the last of the Plantagenets. 

I now proceed to blazon the Arms of the Plantaoenet 
Princes, with their Marks of Cadency. The figures that are 
attached to the names refer to the corresponding figures in the 
foregoing List. 

King Edward L (9), as Prince Royal, " Primo-genitus Beats 
—England, with a label of Jive or three points az. ; No. 470, p. 173 : 
Roll of II. III., and Seals. 

King Edward II. (14), as Prince Royal :—Englan d, with a 
label of five or three points az. ; No. 430, PI. XLV. : Rolls of E. I. 
and Caer., and Seals. 

King Edward III. (17), as Prince Royal and Earl of Chester : 
— England, with a label of five or three points az. : Roll E. II., 
Seal a.d. 1327. 

Richard, (8), Earl of Cornwall and Emperor. After he had 
aspired to the Imperial Dignity he was generally styled u King 
of the Romans;" died in 1272. As Earl, — Poictou, within a bor- 
dure of Cornwall, that is, arg., a lion rampt. gu., crowned or, within a 
bordure sa., bezanUe ; No. 194, PI. V. As Emperor, — or, an eagle 
displayed, so, ; No. 677, PL LXXVI. 

Edmond, (13), second Earl of Cornwall : — the samo as his 
father, No. 194. He also bore this shield carried by an eagle 
displayed, as in No. 212 c, PI. LXII. ; and having married the 
daughter of the Earl Richard de Clare, he dimidiated Cornwall 
and Clare, No. 320, PL XVIII. : Rolls of H. III., E. L, E. It, 
and Caer., Westminster Shields, Seals. This same shield of 
arms, differenced by having the field erm., the bordure engrailed, 
and a silver mullet charged on the shoulder of the lion, is borne, a.d. 
1443, by Sir John de Cornwall, K.G., Lord Fanhope; No. 433, 
PL LI. : Windsor Garter-Plale. 

Edmond, (10), surnamed " Crouchback," first Earl of Lan- 
caster, the younger brother of the King ; died 1 296 : — England, 



Digitized by Google 



PLATE LX1II. Chapters XUI, xvi., xvni. 

No. 488a.— F.ffigy of Hexhy, First Di ke of Lancaster, a.d. 1347. 
From the Brass to Sir High Hastings, at Elsyng, Norfolk. 
See pp. 113, 235, and 287. 



digitized by Google 



ROYAL CADEHtY. 



235 



with a label of France— a label, that is, of three, four, or five points 
az., fleurettee ; No. 433, PI. XLV., and No. 493, PI. XXXIV. 
Earl Edmond appears to have assumed this label as his Difference, 
on his marriage with his second Countess, Blanch of Artois, 
a.d. 1276. 

Thomas, (25), second Earl of Lancaster :— the same Arms 
and Difference as Earl Edmond his father : what Difference ho 
may have borne during the lifetime of his father I am unable 
to show. He himself was executed in 1322. His only brother, 
Henry, (26), third Earl of Lancaster, before his accession to 
the Earldom in 1322, bore England, differenced with a bendlet az., 
No. 471, p. 173, and No. 610, Chap. XXIV., Section I. After 
1322, Earl Henry (who died 1345) bore the same Arms and 
Difference as his father and elder brother: Rolls E. I., E. II., 
and Caer., Westminster Monument, Seals. 

Thomas, " de Brotherton," (15), Earl of Norfolk and Marshal 
of England ; died 1338 :— England, with a label of three points org. 
Edmond, " de Wodostock," (16), first Earl of Kent ; executed 
in 1329 :— England, with a bordure arg. ; No. 475, PL XXXII. : 
Roll, of E. H., Seals. 

John, " of Eltham," (18), Earl of Cornwall, younger brother 
of the King; died 1336: — England, with a bordure of France; 
No. 332, PL XIX. : Monument at Westminster. 

Henry, (27), fourth Earl and first Duke of Lancaster, died 
1362:— before 1345, England, with a bendlet az. ; Seal, No. 610: 
as Earl, — England, with a label of three or five points of France ; 
also, France Ancient and England quarterly, with a label of France ; 
Seal. It is probable that ho assumed the quartered arms on his 
accession to tho ducal dignity in 1352. In tho Calais Roll, 
a.d. 1347, his arms aro blazoned as, England, with a label of 
France ; and in his effigy in the Elsyng Brass, of the same date, 
he appears wearing upon his jupon these arms — the arms of all 
his predecessors, the Earls of Lancaster ; No. 488 a, PI. LXII1. 

Edmond, (20), second Earl of Kent; died without issue, 1333 : 



Digitized by Google 



236 



ROfAL cadency, 



—and John, (30), his brother, third Earl of Kent; died, also 
without issue, 1353: the same Arms and Difference as their 
father, No. 475, PI. XXXII. 

Tho Marks of Cadency borne on their shields by the Sons of 
Edward III. now come under consideration. His eldest son, 
Edward, K.G., (19), the renowned Black Prince, born at Wood- 
stock, a.d. 1330, Earl of Chester in 1333, (after the death of his 
uncle John, 44 of Elthara," in 1337,) Duke of Cornwall, in 1343 
was created Prince of Wales; died in 1370, and buried in 
Canterbury Cathedral : — ( 1 .) England, with a label of five points 
arg. ; (2.) France Ancient and England quarterly, until a label of 
three points arg. ; No. 339, PL XXXIV., from the Burghorsh 
Monument at Lincoln. The quartered shield appears upon the 
Monument of tho Prince, and the same arms are blazoned on his 
jupon in his effigy; they appear in enamel colours upon tho 
Monument of Edward III., at King's Langley, in tho Great 
Yarmouth series, and in his seals ; the shield with England only, 
used as late as the year 1372, appears in seals of tho Prince. 
See Cott, MS. Jul. cvn, 158 b, 182 b ; Harl. MS., 2099, 433 b, 1 d. 
14,188 ; and Vincent SS, foL 88, in Coll. Arm. 

In his Will, the Black Prince gives directions that on tho 
occasion of his funeral two distinct armorial compositions should 
be displayed in the procession, immediately before his remains ; 
one, for war — " Vun pur la guerre, de nos amies cntiers quartettes " — 
of his quartered arms ; and the other, of his Badge of Ostrich 
Feathers, for peace— 1 ' et V autre pur la paix, de nos bages des 
plumes d'ostruce. Similar shields 44 for war," and *' for peace," 
alternate about the monument of the Prince. Each shield 44 for 
peace " bears, on a sable field, three ostrich feathers erect, two and 
one, arg., with labels charged with the words Ich Dien : No. 234, p. 70. 
In right of his wife, the Princess Joan, the Black Prince would 
impale Holland of Kent ; No. 475, Pis. XXXII. and LXV. 

The plain silver label, first adopted by the Black Prince, has 
been borne by all the succeeding Princes of Wales as their 



Digitized by Google 



CADENCY__ SHIELD S OF THE PLAXTAGENETS. 




LIONEL PLANTAUKNBT JOHN PLANTAr.ENKT 

Of ANTWERP OF GH;. &lt; . I 




EDMOM) THOM AS ic 

KDMtHS'1) PL ANTAfiKNET. HENRY PL ANT AGE NK T 

Of i.AN6l_F&gt; of l*n&lt;". aster 




Prom thfM'-Tj':m»n^ 4 fBw!:.i B"'?-»iiL?i'r Ar. -4 ..£■ •.* fc l" r- 



Digitized by Google 



ItOYAL CADENCY. 



287 



special armorial distinction. The Black Prince himself stands 
at the head of the group of historical Princes of Wales, his 
grandfather Edward II., having borne that title only by virtue 
of a romantic legend. The Caerlaverock Koll, which gives a 
graphic sketch of Prince Edward, the eldest son of King 
Edward I., then " a youth of seventeen years of age and bearing 
arms for tho first timo," in proclaiming the style of the King 
himself is careful to entitle him " Prince of Wales." In like 
manner, Edward III. before his accession was Earl of Chester, 
but not Princo of Wales. 

The Princes of Wales of the House of Plantagenet are as 
follows : — 

1. The Black Prince. 

2. Kichard, son of the Black Prince, afterwards Richard II. 

3. Henry, son of Henry IV., afterwards Henry V. 

4. Edward, son of Henry VI. 

5. Edward, son of Edward IV., afterwards Edward V. 

6. Edward, son of Biciiard III. 

The last four of these Princes bear the silver label charged upon 
France Modern and England quarterly, as in No. 487, p. 230, the 
shield of Henry V., as Prince of Wales, from his Garter-Plate in 
St. George's Chapel. 

No armorial insignia appear to have been assigned to Prince 
William, (20), second son of Edward III., who died young, and 
was buried in York Cathedral, where his effigy still remains. 

Lionet,, (21), third son of Edward III., Duke of Clarence; 
died 1368:— France Ancient and England quarterly, with a label 
of either five or three points, the label itself being charged with certain 
devices for secondary difference. One of tho shields upon the 
Burghersh Monument, No. 490, PI. XXXIV., has been assigned 
to Prince Lionel; this label is of five points, and a single cross 
is blazoned on each point; and it has been suggested that this 
may have been a Label of Ulster— that is. or, charged on each point 



238 



KOYAL CADENCY. 



with a cross gu. Lionel married the heiress of Ulster in 1352, 
and in 1355 he became Earl of Ulster, jure uxoris. The same 
lady, Elizabeth de Burgh, was also co-heiress of the De Clares, 
and in 1362 her husband was created Duke of Clarence, when 
he appears to have assumed a silver Label, charged on each point 
tcith a canton gules— such a canton being reputed to be an ancient 
bearing of the family of De Clare. At St. Alban's, as I have 
already mentioned, there remains a shield of France Ancient and 
England, differenced with a Label of three points arg., on each point 
a canton gu. ; No. 473, PI. XXXI. Among other authorities for 
tho label borne by this Prince, reference has commonly been 
made to the small enamelled shield, the third in tho series, 
that remains beneath one of tho " Weepers " on the south side of 
the monument of Edward III., in Westminster Abbey. In 
No. 489, PI. XXXI., I give a facsimile (engraved from my own 
tracing) of tho original of the label blazoned upon this shield, 
from which it appears that each point is charged with a canton 
gules (or rather a billet), interposed between two torteaux. The 
original shield is of metal, and the charges upon the label are 
formed of a vitreous paste, inlaid in matrices sunk for its recep- 
tion, the paste itself having been raised so as to represent these 
small charges in relief upon the polished silver of the label. 
It is singular that a correct description of this remarkable label 
should not have been before given. The original is open for 
examination, and it does not appear to be possible that it 
should have been subjected to any alteration ; unless, indeed, in 
the first instance, this label bore three torteaux ; and afterwards, 
on the union of the houses of York and Clarence by tho marriage 
of Richard Plantaoenet " of Coningsburgh " with Anne Mor- 
timer, the central torteau of York was cut away, and the canton 
of Clarence made to assume its place. This suggestion would 
assign both this shield in its original condition, and the statuette 
above it, to Edmond Plantaoenet " of Langley," and not to his 
elder brother Lionel. In right of his wife, Elizabeth de Burgh, 



Digitized by Google 



CADENCY IrA BEL'S OF -T-II F. PI »"A XTA( iE XE T S . 

CHAFTF.'H XVI 



A 



ni 




• 


II 




1 




1 


i 

□ 





4&lt;M 



L±J 

4-»; 



V 'I 



o 



► 

LiJ 



Ha-H xxx: 



J 





o 




0 








o 


c 


e 




_ 



; 



4 4 



=1 




i 


it i 


i 






$ 




1 


• 


_ L 








ju 




i 




Digitized by Google 



Digitized by Google 



ROYAL CADENCY. 



239 



Prince Lionel would impale De Burgh of Ulster — or, a cross gu. : 
Monuments at Westminster, Langley, and Lincoln. 

John, " of Ghent," (22), fourth son of Edward III, K.G., 
Duke of Lancaster and King of Castile and Leon ; died Feb. 3, 
1399 -.—France Ancient and England, with a label of three points 
ermine. This label may be blazoned " of Brittany" having been 
derived from the ermine canton borne by John de Dreux, Count 
of Brittany and Earl of Richmond, on whose death, in 1342, the 
Earldom of Richmond was conferred by Edward III. on his 
infant son, Prince JonN. The ermine label is generally blazoned 
with three spots on each point, as in No. 494, PI. XXXI., the spots 
being in pale: a different arrangement has been shown in 
No. 468, at St, Alban's ; and again, at Great Yarmouth, in No. 469 ; 
at Lincoln also, the same label appears charged with two spots 
only upon each point, No. 491, PL XXXIV. John of Ghent 
was created Duke of Lancaster in 1362, and in the following 
year Earl of Derby, Lincoln, and Leicester : also, on his mar- 
riage with Constance of Castile, ho assumed the title of Kino 
of Castile and Leon. He impales the arms of his first wife, 
Blanche of Lancaster, No. 488, PI. XLV. : he afterwards impales 
Castile and Leon, No. 135, PI. I., placing his Royal coat on the 
dexter side of his shield. He also bears, sa., three ostrich feathers 
erm., the quills and scrolls or : Seals ; Monuments at Canterbury, 
Westminster, and Lincoln ; Roll of R. II. 

Edmond, »« of Langley," (23), fifth son of Edward III., K.G. 
Duke of York ; died 1 402 : — France Ancient and England quarterly, 
with a label of three points org., charged on each point with torteaux ; 
these torteaux are generally blazoned three on each point, as in 
No. 496, PI. XXXI. : but in No. 472, from Great Yarmouth, the 
torteaux on each point of this label are two only. The seals 
of this Trince and his stall-plate blazon his label with three 
torteaux on each point ; and his label appears charged in the same 
manner upon his monument at King's Langley. A label counter 
cvmponee or chequte, (probably derived from the well-known 



Digitized by Google 



240 



BOY Alt CADENCY. 



shield of Do Warrennk, (No. 127 b, Pi VI.), carved upon the 
Burghersh monument, No. 492, PL XXXIV., has been attributed 
to Edmond of Langle} T , and is considered to have been borne by 
him before he assumed what may be distinguished as the Label 
of York — the silver label, that is, charged with torteaux. The 
origin of this difference by torteaux is by no means easy to be 
determined. Throe torteaux, however, were borne in chief by 
Tdomas, Lord Wake of Lydel, (or, two bars gu., in chief three 
torteaux. No, 437, PI. L.), whose sister and sole heiress married 
another Edmond Plantagexet, the youngest son of Edward I. 
This Edmond was executed in 1329, being then twenty eight 
years of age ; his two sons died without issue, and thus his only 
daughter became the solo heiress of both her father and her 
mother. This lady, the Princess Joan, married, first, Sir Thomas 
Holland, K.G., and afterwards, the Black Prince. Sir Thomas 
Holland was created Lord Wake of Lydel, jure uxoris ; his eldest 
son, Thomas Holland, bore the same title; and the second 
daughter of his eldest son, Joan Holland, after the year 1394, 
married Prince Edmond of Langley, then Duke of York. In 
default of any more probable theory, I venture to suggest that 
the torteaux of the York Label may possibly have been derived 
from the shield of Wake of Lydel, No. 437, through Edmond of 
Woodstock and the Hollands. Very strange were both the 
distribution and the combination of titles, and the assignment of 
estates and properties in those days ; so that in the torteaux of 
the York Label there may linger evidence of a part, and perhaps 
by no means an unimportant part of the wealth which supported 
the Dukedom of York at the time of its first creation. That 
Prince Edmond of Langley attached very great importance to his 
alliance with the Hollands is declared by the presence of two 
shields, charged with the aims of Holland, upon his monument 
at King's Langley. These two shields, the one bearing England 
within a bordure of France, and the other England within a plain 
bordure, I have recently liberated from the thick coverings of 



Digitized by Google 



ROYAL CADENCY. 241 

mortar which had long completely concealed them; they are 
admirably drawn and carved with great spirit and delicacy in 
alabaster, and (thanks to the mortar) they remain in perfect 
preservation. The exact time in which Edmond of Langley 
adopted the label charged with torteaux, has not yet been de- 
termined : he sealed with this label, however, before his advance 
to the Dukedom of York in 1385, (see Vincent, " Nicholas 
Charles," f. 97, in Coll. Arm.) ; and torteaux are certainly upon 
the label, No. 489, PI. XXXI., blazoned on the Monument of 
Edward III. The Garter-Plate of Prince Edmond is differenced 
with a label charged with nine torteaux, and (at whatever period 
the existing plate may have been executed) its inscription de- 
signates the Prince by his title of Duke of York — u le Duk de 
York Edmod." Still further inquiry, porhaps, may positively 
determine the source from whenco the torteaux of the York 
label were derived, and may also assign an exact date to the 
assumption of that label, in the place of its compony predecessor, 
by Edmond of Langley. 

Prince Edmond was created Earl of Cambridge in the year 13G2, 
and Duke of York in 1385. He impales Castile and Leon, in right 
of his wife, Isabel, younger daughter of Peter, King of Castile 
and Leon : Roll of R. II. ; Seals ; Monuments ; Canterbury shields. 

Thomas, " of Woodstock," (24,) youngest son of Edward III., 
K.G., Duke of Gloucester : — France Ancient and England quarterly , 
within a bordure arg., No. 340, PI. XX., (from the De Bohun 
Brass at Westminster) ; also No. 509, PI. LXX. (See his other 
seals). lie was created EarJ of Buckingham in the year 1377, 
and, jure uxorts, Earl of Essex and Northampton ; and in 1386, 
ho was created Duko of Buckingham. Murdorod at Calais in 
1397. He impales, for his wife Alianore de Bohun, the arms 
of the Earls of Hereford, as in No. 340 : Canterbury Shields ; 
Roll R. II. 

Richard, Prince of Wales, (32,) afterwards King Richard II : 
in the lifetime of the Black Prince, his father, France Ancient 

It 



Digitized by Google 



242 



ROYAL CADENCY. 



and England, with a label of five or three points org., charged on the 
central point mly with a cross gu., No. 485, PI. XXXI. 

Henry " of Bolingbroke," (33), K.G., Earl of Derby, Here- 
ford and Lancaster, afterwards Kino Henry IV., only son of 
John of Ghent : England with a label of France — the shield of the 
Earls of Lancaster, whom he represented, No. 488, PL XLV., 
and No. 493, PL XXXIV. This shield appears to have been 
borne, as an official ensign, by many persons who were in various 
ways connected with the Lancastrian Princes. A good example 
occurs in the Brass to Thomas Leventhorpe, a.d. 1433, at Saw- 
bridgeworth : See Chap. XX1I1. The Label of France, assumed 
aftor his marriage with Blanche D'Artojs by Edmond " Crouch- 
back," was evidently derived from the paternal arms of the 
French Princess ; and thus it may be grouped with the Bordure 
of France of John of Eltham, and the Bordure of England of John 
de Dreux, Count of Brittany, as an example of that early 
Cadency which anticipated Marshalling. 

After the death of his father, February 3, 1399, until his own 
accession on the 30th September following, Henry Bolingbroke 
bears, France Ancient and England quarterly, with a label of five 
prints per pale of Brittany and of France— that is, the three dexter 
points ermine, and the two sinister points azure charged with 
golden fleurs do lys. This label, which is foimed by impaling 
his father's label with his own, appears upon a Seal of Prince 
Henry to a charter dated 18 Eich. II., (Vincent, 33—96, in Coll. 
Aim.) Upon the monument at King's Langley, this label has 
the first and second point ermine, and points three, four and five 
of France, as in No. 486, at the end of this Chapter. At Great 
Yarmouth, points one, two and thrco are ermine, as in No. 495, 
PI. XXXIII. Prince Henry was created Earl of Derby in 1386 ; 
and in right of his wife, Mary de Bohun, Earl of Hereford and 
Baron Brecknock, and in 1397 he was created Duke of Hereford: 
he succeeded his father as Duke of Lancaster, February 3, 
1399. On the Seal already described (p. 164), he impales tho 



Digitized by Google 



ROYAL CADENCY. 



243 



Confessor with a label Of three points with his quartered shield, 
and again impales De Bohun, No. 347, p. 165: Canterbury 
Shields; Roll of R. II. 

Edward, (34), K.G., Earl of Rutland in 1390. Duke of Al- 
bemarle in 1398, and second Duke of York in 1402, eldest son 
of Edmond of Langley; killed at Agincourt, 1415:— before tho 
death of his father,— France Ancient and England quarterly, with a 
label of Castile — a label gu. t charged on each point with three castles 
or, in commemoration of his mother, Isabelle of Castile and 
Leon, No. 498, PL XXXIII. Vincent (No. 18, f. 88) assigns 
to this Prince at this period a label per pale of Castile and Leon, 
as in No. 499; and the Roll of Richard II., (a.d. 1392—1397) 
blazons the arms of " Le Conte do Ruttlando " with a label of 
five points per pale of York and Castile, — points one, two and threo 
org. having three torteaux charged on each point ; and points four 
and five gules having on each point three castles or, No. 499 a, 
PL LXXIV. iyter the death of his father, Prince Edward bears 
the label of York (with nine torteaux) only, and eventually he 
substitutes France Modern for France Ancient in tho first and 
fourth quarters of his shield. This Prince, for his wife Philippa, 
daughter of Lord Mohun, impales, or, a cross engrailed so. ; Monu- 
ment at Westminster ; Canterbury Bosses ; Seals. 

Richard, " of Coningsburgh," (35,) Earl of Cambridge, second 
and youngest 6on of Edmond of Langley: executed in 1415: — 
before 1402, France Ancient and England quarterly within a bordure 
of Leon— a bordure arg., charged with lioncels rampt. gu. (or, 
purpure), in commemoration of his mother. After 1402 he adds 
tho label of York (with nine torteaux) within his bordure; and 
eventually he changes France Ancient for France Modern, No. 478, 
PL XXXII. ; Seals ; Canterbury Bosses. For his wifo Anne 
Mortimer, this Prince impales Mortimer and De Burgh quarterly. 

Thomas, (38,) K.G., Duko of Clarence, second son of Henry 
IV.; killed in battle in Anjou, March 22, 1421 : — France Modern 
and England, with a label ermine, charged on each point with a canton 

u 2 



244 



ROYAL CADENCY. 



gu., No. 500, PI. XXXI. Before his advance to the Dukedom of 
Clarence in 1411, this Princo appears to have borne his label of 
ermine only without the cantons; Seals; Stall-Plate; Monument 
at Canterbury. He impales Holland of Kent, No. 477 a. PL 
XLV., for his wife Margaret de Holland. 

Jonx (39), K.G., Duke of Bedford (in 1415), Anjou and 
Alencon, Earl of Richmond, &amp;c, third son of Henry IV. ; died 
at Rouen in 1435 : — France Modern and England, with a label im- 
paling Brittany and France, No. 486, p. 253. This label, as I 
have shown, was borne by the father of Duko John between 
February 3, and September 30, 1399; consequently it maybe 
assumed that ho did not difference his own shield with it until 
after his father had become ■ king. Duke John without doubt, 
and his elder brother also, in the first instance bore France 
Ancient. Duko John would bear the label of ermine, as the ensign 
of his own Earldom of Richmond, and also to denote his descent 
from "time-honoured Lancaster," Prince Joh^ of Ghent, his 
grandfather, whoso name he himself bore ; and the label charged 
with fleura de lys he would also bear, as the distinguishing label 
of Lancaster, while at the same time the fleurs de lys might 
further refer to his own alliances with two Princesses connected 
with France. His elder brother, the Duke of Clarence, may bo 
considered in like manner to have assumed the ermine label, as a 
grandson of John of Ghent ; and the cantons he may be considered 
to have regarded as the difference of Clarence. In the Garter- 
Tlate of the Duke of Bedford, his lion crest is gorged with a label 
of five points, identical in its character with the label that dif- 
ferences his shield. This Prince was twice married; first, to 
Anne, sister of Philip, Duke of Burgundy ; and, secondly, to 
Jaqueline of Luxemburg, who subsequently became the wife of 
Sir Richard Widville, and mother of Elizabeth, the Queen of 
Edward IV. : ho, therefore, impales Burgundy — France Ancient, 
within a bordure gu. ; and Luxemburg — arg., a lion rampt. queue fottr- 
che'e gu., crowned or. Seals ; Canterbury Bosses, &amp;c. 



Digitized by Googl 



ROYAL CADENCY. 



245 



Humphrey, (40,) K.G., Duke of Gloucester, youngest son of 
ITenry IV.; died 1447 :— France Modern and England, within a 
bordure arg., No. 47G, PI. XXXII.; Monument at St. Alban's; 
Canterbury Bosses; Seals. Duke Humphrey impales, for his 
first wife, Jaqueline of Ilolland, or, a lion rampt. gu. ; and, for 
his second wife, Eleanor dk Cobham, Cobham, No. 377, PL XXV. 
In his "Pursuivant," (p. 150,) Mr. Planoie blazons tho bordure 
of Humphrey, Duke of Gloucester, as componee argent and sable: 
perhaps he has done this on tho authority of Uiton, who says 
(De milt. off. p. 238), that the Duke bore such a bordure, which ho 
might have assumed when the Earldom of Flanders was granted 
to him in the fourteenth year of Henry VI. The shield of tho 
Duke in the cloisters at Canterbury has a plain bordure ; and in 
his Monument at St. Alban's his shield is repealed again and 
again, carved in relief, but the bordure is plain. Many of 
these shields at St. Alban's are in perfect preservation, and 
they are ensigned with a coronet decorated after a most singular 
manner. The Duke also differences his Lion Crest with a Collar 
argent. 

Richard, (41,) K.G., Earl of Cambridge and Rutland, third 
Duke of York in 1426, Regent of France in 1435, only 6on of 
Earl Richard of Coningsburg ; killed at Wakefield December 31, 
1460 : — France Modern and England quarterly, with a label of York 
(nine torteaux); Garter-Plate; Seals — see Vincent, MS. SS., in 
Coll. Arm. For his wife, Cecilia Neville, this Prince impales, 
gu., a saltirc arg. 

Edward, (43,) Earl of March, fourth Duke of York (in 1460), 
afterwards King Edward IV., eldest surviving son of Richard, 
third Duke of York : — after his father's death, France Modern and 
England quarterly, with a label of York.. I havo not been able to 
ascertain what label this Prince boro during tho lifetime of his 
father. 

Edmond, (44,) Earl of Rutland, second son of Richard, third 
Duke of York; killed at Wakefield, Doc. 31, 1400 :— France 



Digitized by Google 



246 



ROYAL CADENCY 



Modem and England with a label of five points per pale of Leon and 
York, No. 497, PI. XXXIII. 

George (45), K.G., Duke of Clarence, and jure uxoris Earl of 
Warwick and Salisbury, third son of Richard, third Duko of 
York ; murdered in 1477 : — France Modern and England, with a 
label of Clarence, — a label org., charged on each point with a canton 
gu., No. 473, PL XXXI. Garter-Hate; Canterbury Bosses; 
Seals. For his wife, Isabelle Neville, he impales, gu,, a saliire 
org., with a label of three points componee arg. and az. 

Richard, (46,) K.G., Duko of Gloucester, afterwards King 
Richard III., fourth son of Richard, third Duke of York ; killed 
at Bosworth Field, August 23, 1485 .—France Modern and England 
quarterly, with a label erm., charged on each point with a canton gu., 
No. 500, PI. XXXI. ; Garter-Plate ; Canterbury Bosses, &amp;c 

Richard, (49,) K.G., fifth Duke of York, Norfolk and War- 
renne, Earl of Nottingham, second son of Edward IV: — France 
Modern and England, with a label of three points org., the first point 
charged with a canton gu,, No. 4C4, PI. XXXI ; Garter-Plate ; 
Canterbury Bosses. 

Edward, (52,) Earl of Warwick, eldest and only surviving son 
of George, Duke of Clarence, the last of the Plantagenets ; exe- 
cuted Nov. 28, 1499:— France Modem and England, with a label 
of Beaufort— &amp; label componee arg. and az., No. 601, PI. XXXI. 
This label Earl Edward derived, through his mother, from tho 
Nevilles, Earls of Warwick, who in their turn had assumed 
it to denote their own allianco with the House of Beaufort. 

In their Seals, the Plantagenet Princes both impale the arms 
of their Consorts with their own, and they also marshal various 
quarterings. I have not considered it necessary to give quar- 
tered coats, my special object in the foregoing series of shields 
being to indicate the several Labels that were borne by different 
members of the Plantagenet family, as Marks of Cadency. I 
add, as an example of these Quarterings, the arms blazoned on 
one of tho Seals of Richard, third Duko of York : Quarterly, 1 



Digitized by Google 



CADEKCY L AB KITS. 

CnAr . in XVj 




Digitized by Google 



Digitized by Google 



MARSIIALI/INC; &amp; ( ADKXCl 




CCnVFBSfiOR. MOWBRAV CONFKSSOK HOLLAND 




Digitized by Google 



ROYAL CADENCY. 



247 



and 4, York ; 2. Castile and Leon ; 8. Mortimer and De Burgh quar- 
terly ; and, over all, Holland of Kent, 

II. Cadency of the De Hollands. 

In the time of Edward L, Robert de Holland married Maud, 
daughter and co-heiress of Alan de la Zouche. Of their four 
sons, Thomas the second son, and Otho the youngest, were Knights 
Founders of the Garter. This Sir Thomas de Holland, K.G., 
married Joan Plantagenet (who afterwards was the wifo of tho 
Black Prince) j and his two sons, accordingly, were half-bro- 
thers of Richard II. In the Calais Roll, Sir Thomas bears his 
paternal arms, az. t fleureUie, a lion rampt. guard, arg., No. 637, 
PI. LXV., differenced with a crescent gu. ; and Sir Otho differences 
with an annulet gu. 

Thomas de Holland, K.G., second Earl of Kent, and second 
Baron Wake jure matris, eldest son of Sir Thomas; died in 
1397, having married Alice db Fitz-Alan: England, within a 
bordure arg. t No. 475, Pis. XXXII. and LXV. ; Roll of R. II. ; 
Canterbury Bosses; King's Langley Monument; Seals, &amp;c. 
Also, by a special grant from Richard II., tho same arms, im- 
paled by the Confessor within a bordure erm. ; No. 342, PI. XXII. ; 

Thomas de Holland, third Earl of Kent, and Duke of Surrey, 
eldest son of Earl Thomas; executod in 1400 :— England, within 
a bordure arg. ; No. 475, PI. LXV. 

Edmund de Holland, K.G., fourth and last Earl of Kent, 
second son of Earl Thomas: the same arms as his father and 
brother. 

JonN de Holland, K.G., Earl of Huntingdon and Duko of 
Exeter, second son of Sir Thomas; executed in 1400, having 
married Elizabeth, daughter of John, "of Ghent:" England, 
within a bordure of France; No. 447 a, Plates XLV. and LXV. ; 
Roll R. II.; King's Langley Monument; Canterbury Bosses; 
Seals. Also, by special grant from Richard II., tho samo arms 



Digitized by Google 



248 



ROYAL CADENCY. 



impaled by the Confessor, differenced by a libel of three points arg.; 
No. 631, PL LXV. 

John de Holland, K.G., second Duke of Exeter and Earl of 
Huntingdon, second son of Joiin, the first Duke: the same arms 
as his father, without the Confessor. 

John de Holland, third and last Duke of Exeter, only son of 
the second Duke : the same arms as his father. 

III. Cadoncy of the De Beauforts. 

In the year 1397, the Act for the legitimation of the De Beau- 
forts, the sons of John of Ghent and Catherine Swynford, was 
passed and became law. 

John de Beaufort, K.G., Earl and Marquess of Somerset, and 
Marquess of Dorset, the eldest son : — before the year 1397, per 
pale arg. and az., a bend of England ensigned with a label of France ; 
(see Chap. XXVIII., Section 2) ; after 1397, France and England, 
(at first, France Ancient), within a bordure componee arg. and az., 
(the riantagonet colours), No. 479, PI. XXXII. 

Henry de Beaufort, Cardinal, Bishop of Winchester, and 
Lord Chancellor, the second son :— before 1397, the same arms 
differenced with a crescent ; after 1397, France and England, within 
a bordure componee az. and arg., a crescent of the last for secondary 
Difference ; No. 480, PL XXXII. Nicholas Charles gives a seal 
of the Cardinal (p. 127), in which his shield has the bordure 
componee arg. and az., tiie central az. square in chief being charged 
with a mitre or. 

Thomas de Beaufort, K.G., Duke of Exeter, Earl of Dorset 
and of Harcourt in Normandy, the third son : — before 1397, as 
his two brothers, for difference a mullet; after 1397, and until 
1417, France and England, within a bordure componSe az. and erm., or 
erm. and az. ; after 1417, the bordure componee arg. and of France, 
or of France and arg. (the fleurs de lys from the Hollands), No. 
484, PL XXXII. 

John de Beaufort, K.G., and Edmond de Beaufort, sons of the 



Digitized by Google 



CADEXCY - B ORDURES. 

r, HAr»" .£73 V XXV; 




digitized by Google 



Digitized by Googl 



ROYAL CADENCY. 



249 



first John de Beaufort, and both of them in succession Dukes of 
Somerset, and also Henry and Edmond de Beaufort, sons of the 
first Edmond, and Dukes of Somerset, bear the same arras with 
the bordure compone"e either arg. and az., or az. and arg., with 
either a label or a muUet charged over all for secondary difference ; 
Garter-plates ; Seals ; Monuments at Canterbury, and at West- 
minster and Wimborno Minsters, &amp;c. 

IV. Cadency of the Tudors. 

Edmund Tudor, "of Hadham," Earl of Richmond in 1452, 
eldest son of Queen Catherine and Owen Tudor : France Modern 
and England, within a bordure az., charged alternately with ficurs de 
lys and martlets or; No. 482, PI. XXXII. He died, a.d. 1450, 
having married in the previous year Margaret, the only child 
of John de Beaufort, first Duke of Somerset and his wife, Mar- 
garet Beauchamp of Bletsho, from whose arms (No. 369. PI. 
XXV), he obtained the martlets of his bordure, as the fleurs de 
lys were derived from the Hollands; Westminster Monu- 
ment. 

Jaspar Tudor, K.G., Earl of Pembroke in 1452, and in 1485 
Duke of Bedford, second son of Queen Catherine and Owen 
Tudor : France Modern and England, within a bordure az., charged 
with martlets or ; No. 483, PI. XXXII.; Garter-plate; Seals, &amp;c. 
A grant of land in the county of Monmouth from Jaspar Tudor 
bears his seal, charged with his arms; No. 683; see Chapter 
XXIV., Section 1. 

Henry Tudor, afterwards Kino Henry VII :— before his 
accession, Aug. 22, 1 485, the same as his father, Edmund Tudor, 
No. 482, PI. XXXII. ; Monument at Westminster ; Seals. 

Arthur Tudor, K.G.,Prince of Wales, eldest son of Henry VII., 
died in 1502 : — France Modern and England, with a label of three 
jknnts arg. ; Monument in Worcester Cathedral ; Seals. 

Henry Tudor, K.G., afterwards King Henry VIII.: —before 
1502, France Modern and England, with a label of three points a m. ; 



Digitized by Google 



250 



ROYAL CADENCY. 



Stall-plate; after 1502 and until his accession in 1509, as 
Prince of Wales, the same arms with a stiver label. 

Edward Tudor, afterwards King Edward VX : — before his 
accession in 1207, France and England, with a label arg. As nomi- 
nally Prince of Wales also, on one of his seals ho bears, as the 
arms of tho Principality, Tliree lions coward in pale, No. 699, 
PI. LX : and a similar shield is also blazoned ujK&gt;n a seal of 
Edward V., as Prince of Wales. See Chapter XXIV. 

The succession of tho Princes of Wales from the last of tho 
Tudors is as follows ; they all difference the Royal Arms of their 
own period with a silver label of three points : — 

Henry Stuart, Prince of Wales in 1610 ; No. 537, PL LVHX, 
with tho silver label. 

Charles Stuart, afterwards Charles I., Prince of Wales in 
1612 ; the same arms and difference. 

Charles Stuart, afterwards Charles II., Prince of Wales in 
1639 ; the same arms and label. 

George II. ; Frederick Lewis ; and George m ; successively 
Princes of Wales : No. 542, PL LIX., with the silver label. 

George IV., tho same arms and difference till 1801 ; from 
1801 till 1816, No. 543, with the Electoral Bonnet of Hanover, 
No. 542 a, PI. LXXVI., instead of the Royal Crown, and the silver 
label; and from 1816 till his accession 1820, No. 543, and tho 
same difference of a silver label. 

H.R.H., The Princess Charlotte Augusta of Wales, Daughter 
of Geo. IY\ : On a lozenge the Royal Anns (without tho Crown of 
Charlemagne, and without tho Electoral Bonnet) with a label of 
three points arg., on the central point a rose gu. The Coronet of 
crosses paUe'es, fieurs de lys and ducal leaves, (No. 565). The Royal 
Supporters with the same label and coronet. These arms thus dif- 
ferenced were assigned to the Princess April 16, 1816: and in 
1818 a similar label, but of five points, was granted to tho hus- 
band of H.R.H., tho Prince Leoi-old, now King of tho Belgians. 



Digitized by Google 



ROYAL CADENCY. 



251 



VII. James Stuart, (afterwards James II.,) K.G., as Duke of 
York : the Royal Arms of the Stuarts, No. 537, PL LXIII., with 
a label of three points erm. Garter-Plate, a.d. 1642. 

VIII. Prince George of Denmark, husband of Queen Anne : 
Denmark, as borne by Anne, Queen of James I., with a label of 

iltrpt* rvhinta /&gt;r&gt;n 
uirct/ jyt/imo cnn. 

William Stuart, K.G., son of Queen Anne, styled Duko of 
Gloucester : tlie Royal Arms of the Stuarts, with a label of three 
points org., charged on the central point with a cross gu. Supporters 
and Crest diflferonced with the same label, and both the lions en- 
signed with the Prince's own Coronet. Garter-Plate, a.d. 1695. 

IX. Cadency of the present Boyal Family. 

1. The Family of George III. :— 

IUUI., The Prince of Wales, K.G. : No. 568, PI. XXXVI. 

H.R.H., Frederick, Duke of York : No. 485, PI. XXXI. 

H.R.H., W illiam Henry, Duke of Clarence : No. 569. 

H.R.H., Edward, Duko of Kent: No. 570. 

H.R.H., Ernest Augustus, Duke of Cumberland : on a label of 
three points arg., a fleur de lys az. between two crosses gu. 

H.R.H., Augustus Frederick, Duke of Sussex : on a label of 
three points org., two hearts in pale between four crosses all gu. 

H.R.H., Adolphus Frederick, Duko of Cambridge : No. 577, 
PI. XXXVI. 

H.R.H., Charlotte Augusta Matilda, Princess Royal: No. 
672. 

H.R.H., The Princess Augusta : No. 573. 

H.R.H., The Princess Elizabeth : No. 574. 

H.R.H., The Princess Mary : No. 575. 

H.R.H., The Princess Sophia: No. 576. 

H.R.H., The Princess Amelia : a rose between two hearts gu. 

2. H.R.H., William Henry, Duke of Gloucester, third son of 
Frederick Lewis, Prince of Wales : on a label office points arg., a 
fleur de lys az. between four crosses gu. 



Digitized by Google 



262 ROYAL CADENCY. 

H.R.H., Wiluam Frederick, Duke of Gloucester : tho Bame 
label as the last; and, during his father's lifetime, beneath it a 
second label of three points arg. 

3. Tho Family of Her Majesty, Tiie Queen. 

U.R.H., Tho lato Prince Consort:— a label of three points arg. t 
charged on the central point with a cross gu. 

H.R.H., Albert Edward, K.G., Prince of Wales, K.S.I. : a 
label of three points arg. 

Tho Princes and Princesses, tho younger Sons and all tho 
Daughters of the Queen, difference tJie Royal Arms of England 
with silver label* of three points, each of which is charged with its 
own Marks of Cadency in tho order following : — 

H.R.H., The Prince Alfred : on the first and third points, an 
anchor az., on the central point a cross gu., No. 669. 

H.R.H., The Prince Arthur : a cross gu., between two flours dc 
lys ax., No. 570, PI. XXXVI. 

H.R.H., Tho Prince Leopold : a cross between two hearts, align., 
No. 671. 

H.R.H., The Princess Royal : a rose, between two crosses all gu., 
No. 672. 

H.R.H., The Princess Alice: a rose gu., between two ermine 
spots, No. 573. 

H.R.U., The Princess Helena : a cross, between two roses, all 
gu., No. 574. 

H.R.H., The Princess Louisa : a rose, between two cantons, all 
gu., No. 575. 

H.R.H., The Princess Beatrice : a heart, between two roses, all 
gu., No. 57G. 

I presume that in duo time his grandfather's label (No. 485, 
PI. XXXI.) will be assigned to the infant Prince, Albert Victor, 
the eldest son of the Prince of Wales, as that same label was 
borne by Richard, afterwards Richard II., when he was the eldest 
surviving son of Edward, tho Black Prince, Prince of Wales. 

4. The label of Cambridge is charged on tho central point with 



Digitized by Google 



ROYAL CADENCY &amp; HHITISH KXS1GKS. 



CHAPTERS OTIi X:X 



M.RH THE PRINCE OF HALES H It H THE PHIM KSS ROYAL. 



^31 



H.R.H. THE PRINCE ALFRED H.R.H THE PRINCESS ALICE 



■31 C 




H.R.H. THE PRINCE ARTHCR H R H THE PRINCESS HELENA 



H H H THE PRINCE LEOPOLD H R H THE PRINCESS LOCISA. 



■i ,. 1+ * 



P 




H.R H THEPCKE OP CAMBRIDGE II. R H THE PRINCESS BEATRICF. 




1?TRED EN SKIN S^PRED EN SHIN .'IT RED ENSIGN 




BUTE ENSIGN 



mm 






SJ2 




SJ.&lt; 



WHITE or ST GEORGE S ENSIGN 








. — . 




— 



n,,t* xxxv: 



Digitized by Google 



Digitized by Google 



ROYAL CADENCY. 253 

the Cross of St. George, and on each of the two other points with 
two hearts in pale gu. ; No. 577, PL XXXVI. 

Marks of Cadency for Princesses were first introduced into 
England on the accession of the present Royal Family to the 
Crown of these Realms. Before this period, the Daughters and 
and Grand-Daughters of tho Crown bore the Royal Arms without 
difference, in a lozenge if unmarried, (see Monuments to Daugh- 
ters of James I., at Westminster) ; or in impalement with tho 
arms of their Husbands, as in the smaller shields upon the 
Monument of Edward III. 

It will bo understood that the miscellaneous examples which 
I have selected to illustrate the principle and the usage of early 
Cadency, are to be regarded simply as typical specimens of their 
several classes. Students will find other examples in abundance, 
many of them as characteristic and interesting as those that havo 
been blazoned in this Chapter and in Chapter XV. 




No. 486. — Shield, from the Monument at King's T^ngley, to Edmond 
Plaktagejtet, K.O., Duke of York, borne by Henry Plaxtagenet of Boling- 
broke, A.n. 1399; and, after his accession as Henry IV., by his third son, 
John Plantagenet, K.O., Duke of Bedford, who died a.d. 1435. 




No. 511. — De BoVUlf Badge, from the central Spandrel of tho Canopy of tho 
Brass to Alianoke de Bohun, Duchess of Gloloebteb, a j&gt;. in 

Westminster Abbey. 



CHAPTER XVII. 

badges; crests; supporters; mottoes, and knots. 

SECTION L 

BADGES. 

A Badge is an heraldic figuro or device, assumed for the pur- 
pose of being borne either absolutely alone, or in connection 
with a Motto, as tho distinctive cognizance of an individual or a 
family of rank and importance. In the first instance, Badges in 
all probability were selected with a view to some significant 
allusion, which they might convey to tho name, rank, office, 
property, personal appearanco or character of the bearer; and 
thus, to a numerous class of Badges the»torm Rebus may be cor- 
rectly applied. These Badges may also bo considered to have 
constituted in themselves an early Heraldry, since thoy certainly 
were in use beforo tho adoption and recognition of regular coats 
of arms; they continued, however, to be held in high favour 
throughout tho palmy days of mediaeval Heraldry. 

In tho fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, Badges wore habi- 



Digitized by Google 



BADGES, CRESTS, SUPPORTERS, MOTTOES, AND KNOTS. 255 

tually used for the decoration of costume, military equipments, 
horse trappings, household furnituro, and indeed for every 
variety of decorative purpose; pieces of plate also and other 
valuable objects were at once adorned and marked by them, and 
in seals they appear both as the accessories of shields, and some- 
times as diapers. 

The figures and devices that were adopted as Badges in the 
fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, like those of an earlier period, 
were commonly Rebuses, and they also occasionally had reference 
to some feudal tenure or alliance. They wore sometimes selected 
from the charges of coats of arms, sometimes thoy were identical 
with crests, but more generally thoy appear to have been alto- 
gether distinct from the other heraldic insignia that were borne 
by tho same persons. There is also a marked distinction in 
many instances to be observed between tho Badges that wore 
used, in connection with Livery Colours, to distinguish the armed 
followers and the retainers and attendants of royal, noble, and 
knightly personages, and tho Badge that any prince, noble, or 
knight might be pleased to assume, and to bear about his own 
person. The Badges of the former of these two classes were 
always well known, and their presence was specially intended 
to declare a certain definite and intelligible fact: whereas, on 
the contrary, the use of tho personal Badgo was generally re- 
stricted to tho individual by whom it had been assumed ; and, 
while it had some occult allusion to the history of the bearer, it 
was designed rather to disguise than to proclaim his identity — 
it might be suggestive of a cortain individual, but tho suggestion 
was made by means of some quaint or mystic rebus, which would 
suppress at least as much as it revealed. 

In tho Second part of Henry VI., (Aot V., Scene 1, towards 
its close,) Shakespeare, with characteristic discrimination, has 
adverted to tho use of Badges. Ho makes Clifford conclude his 
brief threatening address to Warwick with the words — 

" Might I but know thee by thy household Bodge l M 



256 



BADGES, CRESTS, SUPPORTERS, 



To which appeal, returning defiance with defiance, Warwick 
replies — 

'* Now, by my father's Badge, old Neville's Crest, 
The rampaut bear chained to tho ragged staff— 

The epithot " household " here most clearly refers to the 
usage of distinguishing all the followers of an eminent personage 
by his well-known Badge ; and the words of Warwick show 
that tho same device was sometimes borne both as a Crest and a 
Badge. It is to bo observed that a Crest always rises from 
either a crest- coronet, an orle, or a chapeau, while the Badge is 
nover accompanied with either of those accessories. Thus, the 
famous Badge of Warwick, the bear chained to a ragged staff. 
No. 206, PI. XXX., if borne as a Crest would be placed upon a 
coronet, as in No. 512 ; or, it might rest upon either a chapeau 
or an orle. I may hero refer to tho singularly fine Brass at 
Warwick to Thomas de Beauchamp, Earl of Warwick, who died 
a.d. 1401, in which there is a chained bear at the feet of tho 
effigy of the Earl : and tho ragged staff appears decorating his 
basinet, his sword-scabbard and elbow-pieces, and it is also 
charged upon a small shield upon the pommel of his sword-hilt. 
This remarkable example of early engraving has been admirably 
rendered by the Messrs. Waller in their great work on Monu- 
mental Brasses, now happily completed— a work to which I refer 
all students of Historical Heraldry. 

The Ostrich Feather Badge. See Arckxdogia, XXXI., 350. 
In his will, (a.d. 1376), the Black Prince speaks of " our Badges 
of Ostrich Feathers," " nos bages des plumes cTostruce and it is 
evident that those Feathers were held by the Prince in high 
esteem, and it would also seem that he regarded them in a 
peculiar light. Thus, the Prince gives directions that, on tho 
occasion of his funeral, two distinct armorial compositions should 
be display od in the procession, immediately before his remains ; 
one, for tear — " Vun pur la guerre de nos armes entiers quartelles," 



&gt; 



Digitized by Google 



BAIM5ES SHIELDS OF AKMSA- KLK(TOKAL BOXXET OF ILLVOYER 




Plate LXXVI 



Digitized by Google 



KNOTS AND MOTTOES. 



257 



of his quartered arms of France and England ; and the other, 
for peace — 11 et l'autre pur la paix&gt; de nos bages des plumes d'ostruee" 
Similar shields 11 for war," and "for peace" (No. 234, p. 70), 
alternate about the monument of the Prince at Canterbury. Tho 
well-known romantic legend which ascribes the origin of the 
famous Ostrich Feather Badge to a memorable incident at Cresci, 
(Aug. 25, 134G), requires more positive corroboration before it 
can be accepted as genuine History. I am not aware that the 
Ostrich Feathers have been in any way directly identified with 
John, King of Bohemia, who on his seal displays as his Crest 
two wings of a vulture of enormous size ; certainly, there is not 
known to exist any proof that the Black Prince himself asso- 
ciated his favourite Badge with his early exploit at Cresci. 
The first mention of this Badge that has been observed, occurs 
in the year 1370. Queen Philippa marked some of her plate 
with the Ostrich Feather shield, No. 234. Upon two of his 
seals, the quartered arms of the Black Prince appear between 
two Ostrich Feathers with scrolls. Tho same Badge was habi- 
tually used by the other Plantagenot Princes; so that, in the 
first instance, it was not held to be either a personal cognizance 
of the Black Prince, or an ensign of the Prince of Wales. John 
of Ghent bears the Ostrich Feather sometimes argent and some- 
times ermine ; thus, tho idea of differencing this Badge appears to 
be contemporary with its first adoption. In a remarkable boss at 
Canterbury, the feathers of Prince John have chains lying along 
their quills. Henry of Bolingbroke appears to have regarded the 
Ostrich Feather Badge with especial favour. In tho seal which 
ho used immediately before his accession, (see p. 104), his im- 
paled shield is placed between two Ostrich Feathers, each of 
which has the word SoTEREIONE, his favourite motto, charged 
upon a scroll entwined about it, No. 684 ; PI. LXXVI. 

The Ostrich Feather with a scroll entwined about it appears 
three times repeated upon a very remarkable heraldic slab, dis- 
covered some years ago under very singular circumstances at 

s 



Digitized by Google 



&lt; 



258 BADGES, CHESTS, SUPPORTERS, 

Venice, and which now is in this country, This slab, No. 684 a, 
PI. LXXIX. (tho lithograph was drawn from a photograph of 
tho original) was supposed, in tho first instance, to be a me- 
morial of Thomas Mowbray, Duke of Norfolk, who died in exile 
at Venice, and under that erroneous impression it is described and 
figured in the Archeeologia, xxix, 387. The slab, however, 
evidently commemorates the visit to Venice of tho exiled 
Duke's great antagonist, Henry of Bolingbroke, with whom 
after his accession to the crown of England the Venetian State 
was most desirous to maintain friendly relations. Upon this 
Slab appears tho crowned and chained Swan of the Boutins, with 
tho Collar of SS, favourito ensigns of Henry : the Royal Banner 
also without any Difference, the Koyal Crest, and tho Badge of 
Henry's Earldom of Derby, the Itart lodged, complete this curious 
composition, tho foreign treatment of which is so evident, par- 
ticularly in the crowned lions of tho banner and tho extra- 
ordinary idea of placing the helm upon the head of tho swan. 
The first Secretum of Henry, as King, displays his quartered 
shield of France Ancient and England between two scrolled feathers 
held by lions. A seal of Thomas, Duke of GLOUCESTER, tho youngest 
son of Edward III., No. 509, PI. LXX., has two large Ostrich 
Feathers similarly placed, and upon the quill of each feather is 
laid a Garter extended, the buckles being in base. The Great 
Seal of this same Prince has its field powdered with small swans &lt; 
and feathers, in lozenges, thus forming a diaper for the field of 
tho seal ; No. 510, p. 38. To Thomas Mowbhay, Duke of Norfolk, 
as an augmentation of high honour, Richard II. granted two 
Ostrich Feathers, to be borne erect, " in sigillo et vexillo suo " 
—in both his seal and his banner. Richard II. himself has the 
red barding of his charger scmeo of Ostrich Feathers, and an 
azure pennon similarly charged. This same Badge was adopted 
by the Beaitforts; ; a fine example of it, tho feathers having ^ 
their quills componte arg. and az., appears in tho Garter-Plato 
of John de Beaufort, K G., first Duke of Somerset, No. 085 

J 

Digitized by Google 



rjtA?TF-F VVJ: Section] 




Digitized by Google 



KNOTS AND MOTTOES. 



259 



PL LXXVI. All the sons of Henry IV. also bear the Ostrich 
Feathers as a Badge ; and it is retained in use until, with the 
close of the Plantagenet era, it gradually assumes a distinctive 
character as the peculiar ensign of the Princes of Wales. Single 
Feathers with scrolls appear on either side of tho shield in the 
singular seals of Edward V., and Arthur Tutor, as Princes of 
Wales, (see Chap. XXIV., Section 1). Prince Edward's Feathers 
are held by two lions, No. 688, and Prince Arthur's by 
dragons, No. 689. On the obverse of the seals the fiold is 
diapered with feathers in lozenges, a rose being at each inter- 
section of the frette ; on the head of Princo Edward's charger is 
a single feather, but tho charger of Prince Arthur has a Crest 
formed of a plume of throe feathers. As one of tho devices that 
diaper tho robe of Annk of Bohomia, in her effigy, tho figure of 
an ostrich is introduced. In Harl, MS., fil 12, in the British 
Museum, it is recorded that the ichite Ostrich Feather with its pen 
golden is the King's : the feather entireb/ white, or silver, is the 




No. &lt;»8H. No. T,8f». 



Prince's : the feather golden, with its pen ermine, is the Duke of Lan- 
caster s : and the feather white, having its pen compouy, is the Duke of 
Somerset' 8. It must be added, tbat the Ostrich Feathers fre- 
quently appear on Seals of an official or corporate character, 

s 2 



Digitized by Google 



200 



BADGES, CRESTS, SUPPORTERS, 



which wore in soino way connected either directly or indirectly 
with the Crown. 

The three Ostrich Feathers, now so happily familiar to us, 
as they are grouped together within the circlet of a princely 
coronet, and borne by our own Prince of Walks, do not date 
back earlier than the era of tho Stuarts. In the Monument 
of Abbot Ramrydge, at St. Alban's, three Ostrich Feathers 
appear united in a single scroll, ; and they arc also represented 
precisely after the same manner in the equally splendid monu- 
ment of Prince Arthur Tudor, in Worcester Cathedral; No 
68G, PI. LXXVI. Single scrolled feathers aro also displayed 
upon tho Worcester monument, and they give the first indication 
of their tips curling over instead of bending to tho sinister. 
Arthur Tudor, Prince of Wales, tho son of Henry VIII., first 
ensigned throe Feathers with a Coronet, and he charged this 
group upon a roundle. Henry Stuart, eldest son of James I., 
established the arrangement of the three feathers within a 
Prince's Coronet, in place of the scroll, as the Ensign of tho 
Prince of Wales ; No. 235 a, PI. XV. On a boss of tho vaulting 
over tho steps that lead to the noble hall of Christchurch, Ox- 
ford, tho plume of three feathers ensignod with a coronot is sur- 
rounded by the Garter of the Order. 

Another renowned historical Badge is tho Rose, tinctured either 
argent or gules, or having both the metal and tho colour conjoined, 
and borne sometimes alone and sometimes in association with other 
devices : (seo pages 75 and 76, and PI. XIII.). In addition to tho 
examples of heraldic Roses that have been already specified, I 
must particularly invite attention to the splendid Roso that 
adorns the monument of Henry VII. ; and I may also refer to a 
cluster of five Roses grouped with singular skill, that were dis- 
covered a few years ago imbedded in the wall of the ruined 
chapel of Abbot Wallingford at St. Alban's, No. 090, PI. 
LXXVI. 

The Swan Badge of the De Bohuxs appears upon the Sccretum 



Digitized by Google 



KNOTS AND MOTTOES. 



261 



of Thomas of Woodstock, Xo. 331, p. 152, between the bases of 
two shields ; and again, in a similar position, upon the seal of 
Pleshy College, founded by the same Thomas and his Duchess 
Alianore. In another seal of this Prince, No. 509, PI. LXX., a 
Swan appears acting as a Supporter to the shield; and, once 
more, the Swan Badge is introduced into the central spandrel of 
the Canopy of the De Bohun Brass at Westminster, No. 511, 
p. 254. Henry of Bolingbroke displays the Swan Badge upon 
his standard, No. 314, Chap. XVIII., and it also appears on what 
I may entitle his Venetian Slab, PI. LXXIX. p. 258. Henry V., 
in like manner, held this same Badge in high esteem. Again, 
besides the Ostrich Feathers, the Black Prince in his Will 
speaks of several devices that he evidently used as Badges — 
these are 11 Swans, Ladies' Heads, and Mermaids of the sea." 
Mermaids also are Badges of the Berkeleys (see page 68) : 
good examples are charged upon the Seal of Maurice de Ber- 
keley, where they act as Supporters to the shield. 

The well-known seal of John of Ghent, in addition to his 
achievement of arms, is charged with his Badges— two Falcons 
holding Fetterlocks in their beaks. The Fetterlock Badge appears 
again in the Brass to Sir Simon dk Felbryoe, E.G., a.d. 1416, at 
Felbrigg; and, with a Sheaf of Arrows and a Portcullis, in the 
monument to Prince Arthur Tudor ; also in the stained glass at 
Canterbury. In allusion to the office of Admiral held by their 
ancestors, the Buoy of a Ship is a Badge of the Nevilles ; and a 
Badge of the Lords Zouche is a Rudder sa., the tiller and stays or. ; 
of this heraldic Rudder there is a good example at Eddington in 
Wiltshire. 

In Section 4 of Chapter XIX. I have given a series of English 
Royal Badges ; here, therefore, I may bo content to adduce only 
a small number of additional examples. Mr. Planche, in his 
Pursuivant of Arms, has printed from a MS. (marked 2nd M. 16) 
of the time of Edward IV., preserved in the Collego of Arms, a 
list of the Badges borne by some of the principal nobility at the 



Digitized by Google 



262 



BADGES, CRESTS, SLTTOIITERS, 



time this list was written. Several of the following examples 
have been selected from Mr. Blanche's list. 

A u UN del : — an acorn. 

Astley : — a cinquefoil ermine. 

Beaufort : — a portcullis, with tho Motto, Altera Sccuritas. 

Br an i on : — a lion's head erased gold. 

Buckingham ;— tho Stafford Knot, No. 515, 11, XXX. 

Clinton :— a golden mullet. 

COBHAH :— a Saracen's head sable. 

Compton : — a fire-beacon. 

Dacre : — a silver escallop, attached by an intertwined cord to 
a ragged staff, No. 513, PL XXX. 

Douglas : — a human heart gules. 

Fitz-Waryn : — a Bourchier Knot, No. 51G. 

Grey of Ruthyn : — a ragged staff — staff ragulee sable. 

Hastings: — a bull's head erased sable, about the nock a 
crown or. 

Howard:— a silver lion, charged on the shoulder with ;i 
crescent azure. 

Hungekford : — a sickle. The Hungerfords also unite their 
sickle to a garb by a cord. Tho Seal of Sir E. DE HuNGEBFORD, 
a.d. 1445, bears, for tho Crest, a garb between two sickles rising 
from a crest coronet ; there is also a sickle on each side of the 
shield. 

Mauleverer: — a white greyhound courant. At Allerton 
Mauleverer in Yorkshire, the Brass (a.d. 1400) to Sir John 
Mauleverer has the arms — gu., three greyhounds courant in pale 
arg., collared or, emblazoned upon the knight's jupon. 

Mowbray : — a mulberry tree. 

Neville :— a dun bull : also, two staples interlaced, one gold, 
the other silver ; and a fretto of gold. 
Norfolk : — a white lion. 
I'elham : — a buckle. 
Percy : — a silver crescent. 



Digitized by Google 



KNOTS AND MOTTOES. 



2G3 



Peverell :— a golden garb. 

Stanley:— a stag's head argent: also a griffin's leg erased 
or. 

Suffolk : — a golden lion queuo fourch6e. 

A remarkable instance of tho artistic ability and of the ver- 
satile resources of the early Heralds occurs in tho interior of 
Westminster Hall. The string-moulding which is carried be- 
neath the windows throughout the building, is studded along 
its entire extent with the helm, crown and crast of Kichard II., 
alternating with his favourite Badge, the while Juirt lodged ; tho 
figures are all boldly sculptured, and though all are most faith- 
fully rendered, every individual white hart (and they are eighty- 
three in number), is unlike every other, and each one has some 
distinct characteristic features of its own. It is the same with 
tho lion crest and the helm, which are placed between two 
ostrich feathers having scrolls attached to their quills. 

Mr. Seton (Scottish Heraldry, p. 250), states that " among the 
nigh landers a species of Badge has in recent times constituted a 
mark of clanship, in the shape of a leaf or sprig of a particular 
treo or shrub (usually an evergreen), which is carried in the 
bonnet or other portion of the costume — thus, the Badge of the 
GORDONS is ivy; of the Campbells, myrtlo; of the Buchanans, 
birch; of the Camkrons, oak; of tho Grahams, laurel; of the 
Murrays, juniper ; of the Kobertsons, fern or brachen ; of the 
Macdonalds, bell-heath; and of tho Macgregors, lime." 



Digitized by Google 



MA DUES, CUES I S, SI '1'IDKTEHS, 



SECTION III. 

( UKSTft. 




No. 523. Achievement of Arms of Humphrey Staffoud, K.G., Earl 
Stafford, a.d. MCO. From his Garter-Plate at Windsor. 

A Chest is a figure or device which originally was actually 
worn upon a Basinet and a Helm, and now is represented above 
a Shield of Arms. From an early period in the era of true 
English Heraldry, the Crest was held to be an ensign of great 
dignity and honour. In the first instance, the Crest was usually 
some figure or device that was also borne in the Arms ; but, in 
process of time, Crests were more generally altogether distinct 
from the Charges of the Shields, though it was common for them 
to assimilate to the Supporters. The Crest was worn supported 



digitized by Google 



KNOTS AND MOTTOES. 



265 



by a Chapeau or a Wreath, or sometimes it rose above a Coronet. 
It also became a usage in the fifteenth century to have the 
Crest rise from out of a Coronet, which was simply a decoration 
to the holm, and supplied the place of the more prevalent 
Wreath. This Crest- Coronet, No. 257 a, probably derived from 




Crust-Coronet.— No. 257 a. 



such a coronot-like enrichment of holms as appears in the effigy 
of Sir Hugh Calvely at Bunbury, No. 257, is still retained in 
modern Heraldry. It is commonly blazoned as a Ducal-Coronet : 
it has no reference, however, to ducal or to any other rank, and it 
might with greater propriety be distinguished as simply a Crest- 
Coronet. In form it bears a clo«e resemblance to the crowns of 
Henry III., (No. 198, p. Gl), and Alianore of Castile. The 
basinet of Sir Hugh Calvkly affords a rich example of the Orle 
or Wreath, No. 257, PI. XVI. : but this accessory was more gene- 
rally worn projecting from the helm, as in tho effigy of Ralph 
Neville, Earl of Westmoreland, at Staindrop, No. 258. See 
Wreath, p. 133. 

The Wreath (see Wreath in Chap. XIII.), is now represented 
having six folds, three of the principal metal and three of the 
principal colour of the arms: and in tho case of a quartered 
shield the tinctures of tho Wreath are those of the first quarter. 
This Crest-Wreath first appears a little before tho middle of the 
14th century: tho Brass to Sir John Harsyck, No. 301 (a.d. 
1384), gives a good early example; and other still earlier ex- 
amples occur in tho seals of Sir John Willoughby (1340), Sir 
Thomas Erskjne (1364), and Sir Alexander and Sir David 
Lindsay (1371, 1389). The Effigy of Sir Humphrey Stafford at 
Bromsgrove, Worcestershire, has been noticed as displaying 



Digitized by Google 



200 



UADGESj CHESTS, SUPPORTERS, 



another early exaraplo of the Crest-Wreath ; this is an error, 
however, the date of that effigy being about 1450, and not 
about 1350. 

Crests are not borno in the armorial insignia of ladies, what- 
ever may bo their rank or condition, with the solo exception of 
the Sovereign. It has long beon the custom for Crests to bo 
assigned to Corporate Bodies, but such an usage must be held to 
bo totally at variance with true heraldic feeling. 

In his second Great Seal, a.d. 1194, Richard I. wears a fan- 
like decoration surmounting his helm, having beneath it a lion, 
No. 259, PL XXVI. In many instances the holms of the thir- 
teenth century have similar Crests, variously adorned. Hum- 
phrey de Bohun, fourth Earl of Hereford, bears the fan-like 
devico both on his own helm and on the head of his charger, 
No. 200; Henry de Lacy, Earl of Lincoln (a.d. 1272-1312) does 
the same ; and, as late as about 1345, Sir Geoffrey Louterell's 
Crest retains its fan-like contour, but it is charged with his arms, 
as in No. 201, PL XXVI. Edward III. upon his Great Seal for 
the first time bears a true heraldic Crest — the Crowned Lion of 
England, standing upon a chapeau, No. 202. This Sovereign 
sometimes also bears an Eagle on his crest : but from this time 
the crowned lion has continued to be the Crest of England. It is 
to bo observed, that the marks of Koyal Cadency were displayed 
as well upon Crests as upon shields. The Royal Lion, for ex- 
ample, stands upon the helm of the Black Prince gorged with 
his silver label, No. 263. PI. XXVI. In like manner, Labels 
and other Marks of Cadency appear upon the Crests of personages 
of noble and knightly rank. Thus, the lion-crests of John Plan- 
t a genet, K.G., Duke of Bedford, of George Plan tag enet, K.G., 
Duke of Clarence, and of JonN Mowbray, K.G., Duke of Norfolk 
(a.d. 1435, 1477 and 1475), as blazoned in their stall-plates, are 
gorged with labels, the first having three, and the latter two five 
points; Nos. 520 and 521, Pis. XXX. and XLI. These labels 
appear to be worn by the lions after the manner of bands or 



Digitized by Google 



CRESTS. 




digitized by Google 



KNOTS AND MOTTOES. 



207 



frills. In No. 451, PI. XLL, the lion-crest of Thomas de Beau- 
fort, K.G., Earl of Dorset, appears gorged with a collar corn- 
ponee arg. and az. 

In some few instances the devices assumed and worn as Crests, 
are identical with those that appear in the shields of arms of the 
wearers ; but the prevailing usage was to assume for the Crest a 
figure altogether different from the charges of the shield ; and 
uncommonly strange, indeed, must have been the appearance of 
the figures that were frequently thus displayed by tho early 
knights upon their helms. A Panaclie, or upright plume formed 
of a large number of feathers, generally the feathers of tho cock 
or swan, was a favourite Crest. This is tho Crest of the De 
Mortimers, and it is admirably blazoned on their seals. Tho 
effigies of Sir Richard Femurddge, K.G., at Hereford, Sir Robert 
de Marmiox, at Tanfield, and of Sir Thomas Arderne, at Elford, 
all of them about a.d. 1400, aro good examples. The panache of 
Sir Edmund de Thorpe, a.d. 1418, at Ashwelthorpe, is formed of 
peacock's feathers, No. 264, p. 110; and such is also the panache 
of Lord Ferrers of Chartley, a.d. 1425, at Merevale, No. 267 a, 
PL XXVI. The Garter-plates of Sir Thomas Erpinoham, K.G., 
of Sir William Philip, K.G., of Sir Symon de Felbryge, K.G., of 
Sir TnoMAS Felton, K.G., and John, Lord Scrope, K.G. (No- 
522, Chap. XXV.,) all of tho fifteenth century, display panache- 
crests. 

Tho Contoise, a " lady's favour" or " token," No. 250, PI. XV., 
is worn with the Crest until about the middle of tho fourteenth 
century, after which time this accessory disappears, and the 
Crest is placed upon its Wreath (probably derived by the Cru- 
saders from the turbans of tho Saracens) Coronet or Chapeau 
rising above the Mantling. Thomas, Earl of Lancaster, a.d. 
1322, on his seal appears having a dragon with a contoise upon 
his helm, and a similar monster is upon the head of his charger, 
No. 524, PI. XXXV. : and tho seal of Ralph de Monthekmer, 
Earl of Gloucester, a.d. 1323, has on his helm an eagle-crest 



Digitized by Google 



268 BADGES, CRESTS, SUPPORTERS, 



and a contoise. This eaglo-crest was a special grant from 
Edward III. to William de Montacute. In Achievements of 
Arms, and particularly in such as are blazoned on Seals, the 
group is arranged in the manner represented in No. 301, PI. I., 
tho Supporters being added on either side as in No. 707 a. The 
Crests in these compositions of the fourteenth and fifteenth 
centuries are almost invariably very largo in proportion to the 
Shields ; and the same remark is equally applicable to the Crests 
that are blazoned in the Windsor Garter-Plates. Thus, in 
No. 523, p. 264, the Swans head and wings borne by Hum- 
phrey, Earl of Stafford, K.G., are of truly imposing propor- 
tions: and of the same usago in Seals No. 707 a, the Seal of 
Richard, Earl of Arundel, a.d. 1330-1375, is an excellent early 
example. 

tflU 




No. 707 a.— Seal of Richard, Earl of Arundel. 

Another good example from tho Garter-Plates I have already 
given in No. 626, PI. LXVI. : this commanding Crest forms a 



Digitized by Google 



KNOTS AND MOTTOES. 



269 



part of the Achievement of the maternal ancestor of the Earl of 
Stafford, Humphrey de Bohun, last Earl of Hereford. 

In military monumental effigies, the helm of the deceased 
warrior very generally forms his becoming pillow ; and upon 
the helm so placed the Crest is constantly represented, with 
the orle or the coronet and the mantling. 1 may specify, as 
additional examples, the sculptured memorials of Ralph de 
Neville, Earl of Westmoreland, at Staindrop, a.d. 1420 ; of 
Richard Beauchamp, K.G., Earl of Warwick, a.d, 1430, at 
Warwick ; the Crest, No. 265, PL XLL, a swan's head and neck, 
is again represented in the Garter-Plate ; of the De la Poles, at 
Wingfield ; and of Sir Humphrey Stafford, at Bromsgrove : also 
the Brasses to Lord Stourton, .a.d. 1404, at Sawtry, Hunts, (the 
Crest is a demi-monk grasping a scourge of knotted cords), No, 266, 
PI. XXVI. ; of Lord William de Bryenne, Seal, Kent, No. 267, 
PI XXVI., (the Garter-Plate of Sir Guy de Bryenne, K.G. 
a.d. 1370, bears the same Crest— a hunting-horn upon a chapeau) ; 
and of Sir JonN de Brewys, a.d. 1426, at Wiston, in Sussex : 
Lord Stourton's demi-monk, derived from the family of Moyne, is 
a canting Crest. The Crest of Bkckford is another most cha- 
racteristic example of the same usage,— it is a herons head erased 
or, gorged with a collar Jleurie git., in the beak a fish arg. ; the Robus 
here is twofold, both the strong sharp beak — bee fort of the fisher 
bird, and the allusion conveyed by the captured fish to tho ford 
of the beck or stream from whence the heron may be supposed to 
have secured his prey : this Crest is most beautifully engraved 
in the " Heraldry of Fish," p. 98. 

The helm of Sir Edmund de Thorpe, No. 264, p. 110, and that 
of Ralph, Lord Bassett, K.G., No. 612, PI. XLV. (from his 
Garter-Plato), may be regarded as models for heraldic helms ; 
and with them may be associated No. 611, PI. XLV., from the 
monument to the Black Prince. Another fine example of the 
Crest-Coronet occurs in tho Brass to Sir Thomas Bromflfie, 
a.d. 1430, at Wimington, No. 268, PI. XXVI., but the Crest 



Digitized by Google 



270 



BADGES, CRESTS, SUPPORTERS, 



itself is lost: and equally fine examples are blazoned in the 
Garter-Plates of Sir Hugh jm; Courtenay, Lord WiLLODOHBY, and 
Sir Thomas Felton, amongst the earliest of the existing series at 
Windsor. In his Brass at Harpham, a.d. 1420, Sir Thomas de 




No. GDI. — Crest : Sir T. Dl Saint No. 092.— Croat-Wreath : Lord 

QlINTIN. WlLLOlGHBY D'KRESBY. 

Saint Quintin is represented with a singular modification of the 
panache upon his basinet, No. b'Ol ; and in another Brass at 
Spilsby, a knight, probably William, Lord Willoughby 
D'Eresby, a.d. 1400, has his basinet encircled with an orle of 
roses, No. 092. 

Tho Garter-Plate of Joiln, Lord Lysle, K.G. (one of the 
Knights Founders of the Order), furnishes a striking example 
of the extraordinary Crests that were worn even by men of most 
eminent distinction. Resting immediately upon his basinet, the 
Crest of Lord Lysle is a mill-stone arg., pecked m., the inner circle 
and the rim of the second, the fer-d"-mdine or, No. 693, PI. LXIV. 
Tho Crest of the Bourchieiis appears in several of the Garter- 
Plates, with some slight modifications for Difference: it is a 
Saracen's head in profile ppr. t bearded sa., wearing a tall cap gu., 
which bends towards the dexter, and is tasselled or. This cap, in the 
Garter-Plate of Henry Bourchiek, Earl of Essex, rises from a 
crest-coronet which is interposed between tho head and the cap 
itself : this coronet is gold&lt;m, and has on its circlet three tcater- 
bougets sa. In tho remarkable monument of LuDOFIC Rodesart, 



COKOXETS. MAXTLINCrS ^ (RESTS 




Digitized by Google 



Digitized by Google 



KNOTS AND MOTTOES. 



271 



K.G., Lord Boukchier, Standard-Bearer to Henry V., the cap or 
bonnet of the Saracen's-head Crest is surmounted by a Catherine- 
wheel, derived from the arms of the Roets, with whom he was 
connected ; this, accordingly, is an example of Marshalling in a 
Crest. The Crest of Sir John Daubygne, a mullet surrounded by 
holly-leaves, has been already blazoned; (see pages 47 and 134, 
and No. 408) ; another curious crest of a somewhat similar cha- 
racter, borne by Joiin de Wydevil, — appears on his monument 
at Grafton Regis, Northants ; it is a bird sitting on a tuft of oak- 
leaves, a scroll (now without any legend) issuing from its beak. 

Seals abound in admirable examples of Crests, and they 
illustrate many curious modifications of mediaeval heraldic usage. 
Thus, the Crest of the Mortimers, a lofty panache of many azure 
feathers rising from out of a crest-coronet, No. 269, PL XXVI., is 
represented in various seals of members of the House of March : 
but Edmund Mortimer, a.d. 1372, has a seal charged with his 
paternal shield, susponded by its guigo from a rose-tree, and 
having the inescutcheon diapered; and, in place of tho helm 
and crest above the shield, on either side of the shiold placed as 
a supporter is one of the white lions of the Earls of March helmed, 
the two helms almost enclosing the lions, and having mantling, 
coronet, and crest, and respecting each other; No. 270, Chap. 




No. '270 a.— Soul of EDMUHD De ARUNDEL. 

XXIV. Another seal, that of Edmund de Arundel, who was 
Earl from 1301 till 1320, has two crested helms similarly placed, 
but without any animals as supporters, No. 270 a. Tho 



272 



BADGES, CRESTS, SUPPORTERS, 



Crest of Delabere, of Gloucestershire, is another interesting 
example of what originally was doubtless a panache : this Crest, 
now burno as a plume of Jive ostrich feathers per pale arg., and az., 
issuing from a crest-coronet, is said to have been given to Sir 
Richard de la Bere by the Black Prince in acknowledgment of 
signal service rendered to him at Cresci. Panache or Plume 
Crests sometimes are differenced ; as by the Tyndalls, with either 
a martlet or an ermine circlet, No. 267 b. It appears to have 




No. 2G7 b. — Crests of Tyndai.l. 



been a favourite custom to place the head and neck of a bird or 
of any imaginary winged creature between two lofty groups of 
upright feathers, and thus to form a Crest: the Seals of the 
Earls of Arundel provide good examples of this singular usage, 
as in No. 694, PI. LXIV., the Crest of Richard Fitz Alan, a.d. 
1390. In No. 199 a, p. 62, an ermine, the Crest of Lord Dynham, 
K.G., stands between two tall spikes that issue from the Cap of 
Estate. 

Crests are now generally represented resting upon a wreath ; 
but the crest-coronet and also the chapeau are still retained in 
modern blazon : for example, the Crest of the Duke of Rutland 
is on a chapeau gu., lined erm., a peacock in its pride, proper. The 
Duke of Newcastle bears the same crest upon a wreath. Walter 
Long, of Preshaw Houso, Hants, Esquire, bears as his Crest, out 
of a crest-coronet or, a demi-lion rampt. arg. 

Crests, like shields of arms, being held to be hereditary, it 
necessarily follows that the same person may inherit and may 



Digitized by Google 



KNOTS AND MOTTOES. 



27.3 



rightly bear two or more crests, as he may quarter two or more 
than two coats of arms : for example, the Earl Fitzwilliam bears 
these two crests; — 1st, out of a crest-coronet or, a plume of three 
ostrich feathers org.; and 2nd, on a wreath or and sa., a griffin 
passant ppr. It must be added, that in this country the strict 
rule is that only one Crest can be borne, except under the follow- 
ing conditions : — 1st, By a special grant from the Crown, as an 
augmentation; such are the Crests of Wellesley, Hardixge, 
Cameron, Bart. : or, 2ndly, When any person may have obtained 
the Royal licence to bear and use the name and arms of another 
family in addition to his own, in any such case the Crosts of both 
families are displayed above the quartered arms ; the Crests of 
the Dukes of Buckingham, Leeds, Richmond, and Sutherland, tho 
Marquess of Lansdowne, of Dalrymple-Hay, Bart, are examples. 

For further illustration, I add a few other examples of Crests. 

Percy, Duke of Northumberland : — On a chapeau, a lion statant, 
his tail extended or. In No. 185, p. 55, this lion is represented 
without the chapeau. 

Howard, representative of Mowbray, Duke of Norfolk :— On 
a chapeau, a lion statant guardant, his tail extended or, and ducally 
gorged arg. This lion of the Howards is represented in No. 186, 
p. 55, without either the chapeau or the coronet. It was 
originally granted by Richard II. to Thomas Mowbray, Earl 
Marshal. 

Fitz-Alan, Earl of Arundel .—Out of a crest-coronet or, a griffin's 
head arg., beaked gu., between a pair of wings erect; No. 694, 
PI. LXIV. 

Neville, Earl of Westmoreland -.—From a wreath, a dun bttlVs 
head and neck erased ppr. (Monument and Seals.) 

Ralph, Lord Bassett, of Drayton, E.G. .—Out of of a crest- 
coronet, a boar's head erased sa., armed or. (Garter-Plate.) 

Stanley, Earl of Derby :— On a chapeau, an eagle, wings ad- 
dorsed or, hovering over an infant in its nest ppr., swaddled at , banded 
of the first. (Garter-Plate.) 

r 



Digitized by Google 



274 BADGES, CRESTS, SUPPORTERS, 



The Stanleys have deiived this Crest from the Lathams, of 
whom it is recorded that one of the heads of their houso adopted 
as his heir a child which had been exposed in an eagle's nest in 
Latham Fark, but which the eagle had carefully nurtured, instead 
of destroying it. 

Kirkpatrick, of Closeburn : — On a wreath, a dexter hand, couped 
at the wrist, holding erect a dagger imbrued, ail ppr., with the motto, 
" Tse mak siker" No. 525 a, PL XXX. 

The historical origin of this Crest and its Motto is well known. 

Pole, Sir Kichard, K.G., lather of the Cardinal :— On a wreath, 
a cormorant trussing a fish, all ppr. (Garter-Vlate.) 

Wodehouse, Baron Wodehouse: — On a wreath, a dexter hand 
Iiolding a club, all ppr. In chief, the words, 14 Frappcz fort." In 
base, the word " Agincourt." 

Pelham-Clinton, Duke of Newcastle : For Clinton :— Out of a 
crest- coronet, a plume of five ostrich feathers arg., banded with a line 
set chevron-wise az. For Pelham :— On a wreath, a peacock in its 
pride ppr. 

An early crest of the Pelhams was a lantern. 

Drake : — Out of a wreath, a ship, drawn round a globe with a 
cable-rope by a hand issuing out of clouds, all ppr. ; in chief, the 
motto, Divino Auxilio. No. 144 b, PI. XXVI. 

Hope : — Out of a wreath, a broken ghbe, surmounted by a rainbow 
issuing out of a cloud at each end, all ppr. No. 144 a, PI. XXVI. 

Wellesley, Duke of Wellington Out of a ducal coronet or, a 
demi-lion rampt. gu., holding a swallow-tailed pennon of the last, 
the fly to the sinister, and at the head charged with the ensign of 
St. George. 

Douglas Hamilton, Duke of Hamilton —Out of a crest-coronet, 
an oak-tree fructed, penetrated transversely in the main stem by a 
frame-saw, all ppr., the saw-frame or. 

The old Earls of Dunbar and March, who were hereditary 
Wardens of the Marches of the Scottish border, bore for a Crest 
a horses head bridled ; and tho Marquess of Annandale, also a 



KNOTS AND MOTTOES. 



275 



Lord Marcher, had for his Crest a spur erect, between a pair of 
wings, both Crests being designed to intimate prompt readiness 
and speed in pursuit 

Crests may be considered to have been occasionally adopted 
with a view to a species of Marshalling. 

SECTION III. 

8UPPORTEUH. 

Supporters are figures, whether of human or imaginary creatures, 
or of living creatures of whatever kind which, as a general rule, 
stand on either side of a shield, as if in the act of holding it up 
(supporting it), or guarding it. Supporters, accordingly, in the 
great majority of instances, and more particularly in the Heraldry 
of England, appear in pairs, one on the Dexter and the other on 
the Sinister of the shield. The usage prevalent in early times, 
with occasional exceptions, was that the two Supporters should 
bo alike ; but in modern English Heraldry they vory frequently 
are altogether distinct from one another, as in the instance of the 
Royal Supporters of England, the Lion and the Unicorn. French 
Heralds distinguish Human Figures, when they appear supporting 
any Shield, by the title of " Tenants," while all Animals dis- 
charging a similar duty are styled " Supporters." 

Single Supporters, which are by no means uncommon in Con- 
tinental Heraldry, occasionally appear in the early Seals of both 
England and Scotland ; and in our own times some few relics of 
this original practice still survive ; thus, the Lord of the Manor 
of Stoko-Lyno, in Oxfordshire, charges his paternal Shield upon 
the breast of a hawk, by virtue of a special grant of Charles I. 

I have given examples of early English Single Supporters in 
No. 201, PL XX.; No. 212 c, PI. LXII. ; and Nos. 509, 525, 
PI. LXX. : and in his Scottish Heraldry (pp. 260-272), Mr. Seton 
has shown what Scottish Seals exemplify this usage in the most 
characteristic manner; and to some of these I presently shall 
more particularly refer. 

r 2 



Digitized by Google 



276 



BADGES, CRESTS, SUPPORTERS, 



These honourable accessories of the Heraldic Shield are said 
to have been introduced, (like Quartering), by Edward III., but 
they are of uncertain authority until the reign of Henry VI. 
Supporters are now borne, by right, by all the Peers of the 
Realm, by Knights of the Garter, and Knights Grand Crosses of 
the Bath, also by the Nova Scotia Baronets, and the Chiefs of the 
Scottish Clans ; and they are conceded to those Sons of Peers 
who bear honorary titles of Nobility. Supporters are not granted 
in England without the express command of the Sovereign ; but 
in Scotland " Lord Lion" enjoys this privilege. Supporters are 
not borne by any Spiritual Poors. They appear associated with 
the Arms of many persons of various ranks, who have derived 
them from some distinguished ancestors. The actual origin of 
Supporters has been a subject of much speculation with writers 
on Heraldry. I am disposed to consider that they may be de- 
rived in part from a desire to combine personal Badges with 
hereditary heraldic compositions, while in part Supporters may 
have resulted from certain early forms of either Marshalling or 
Differencing. It is highly probable, also, that the introduction 
of these accessories of Shields of Arms may have been greatly 
influenced by the grotesque lizards and other figures in such 
favour with illuminators, and which, with various animals, the 
early seal-engravers commonly introduced as ornaments — " not, 
however," as Mr. Planche" judiciously remarks, u without some 
heraldic intention." And again, the oarly habit of grouping two 
or more Shields w r ith an Effigy, and more particularly the group- 
ing together a single Shield and Effigy, or the suspending a 
Shield from a tree upon a seal, might load by an easy transition 
to the adoption, first, of a single figure, and afterwards of two 
figures to support a Shield. 

Animals, either the same as appear in the blazon of the 
shields which they "support," or obtained from some allied 
coat of arms, together with personal and family Badges, are 
common on Seals long before the regular appearance of true 



Digitized by Google 



KNOTS AND MOTTOES. 



277 



Supporters, under the conditions that they still continue to 
assume ; and hence, from the introduction of these figures on 
each side of shields of arms upon seals may be directly derived 
the two figures, that in the fifteenth century become regular 
accessories of the heraldic Achievements of Royal and noble 
personages. From their first appearance, Supporters, liko 
Crests, have been charged with Marks of Cadency. 

The figures of animals that wero introduced into their com- 
positions, and charged by the early heraldic seal-engravers with 
the duty of Supporters, are placed in various positions, but they 
always lead more or less directly to the idea of the true Sup- 
porter, that afterwards was accepted with common consent. 
The earliest indication of the use of an heraldic Supporter to 
which I am able to refer, occurs in the seal of Richard, second 
Earl of Cornwall, about a.d. 1290, (No. 212 c, PI. LXII.), in 
which an imperial eagle holds in his beak the guigo of the 
shield. The seal of Humphrey de Bohun, a.d. 1322, (No. 201, 
PL XX.), is a second most interesting example of the early seal- 
engraver's feeling in the matter of a Supporter. The guigo, or 
shield-belt, instead of being passed over a boss or some other 
architectural detail, in this shield is carried by the simn, that was 
the Badge of the Earls of Hereford. Another seal, (No. 502, PL 
LXX.), exhibits the De Bohun Swan in the same position above 
the shield ; but here the guige is omitted, and in its stead the 
chain that leads from the collar of the bird is fastened to tho 
chief of the shield ; this is one of the seals of Thomas Flan- 
tagenet, Duke of Gixiucestek, the youngest son of Edward 
III., who married the elder of the two co-heiresses of the 
last Earl of Hereford. The impression of this seal from which 
the wood-cut has been drawn, is attached to a deed bearing the 
date 1395. The seal of Thomas Holland, Earl of Kent, half- 
brother of Richard II., of a rather earlier date, represents tho 
shield of arms of tho Earl — England, within a bordure arg., 
having the guige buckled round the neck of a white hind lodged. 



Digitized by Google 



278 



BADGES, CRESTS, SUPPORTERS, 



(No. 525, PI. LXX.), an animal closely allied to the white hart 
which was King Richard's own favourite Radge. This singularly 
beautiful seal carries out the idea of a Supporter in a most 
agreeable manner. The seal of Edmund de Mortimer (seep. 271, 
and No. 270), is another example that is equally curious, charac- 
teristic, and interesting. The Falcons of John of Ghent, the 
Ostrich Feathers of his son, the Angels that are grouped around 
the Shield of Richard II. at Westminster Hall, the Mermaids 
of the Bekkeleys, with the quaint lizards of tho early seal- 
engravers, all take a part in preparing the way for Supporters. 
The seal of Henry, first Duke of Lancaster, about a.d. 1350, has 
the shield placed between two lions sejant guardant, addorsed, and 
above there is the demi-figuro of an Angel with expanded wings. 
An Angel, again, is represented with singularly impressive effect, 
supporting the shield on the beautiful seal of Mary of Gueldres, 
Queen of James II. of Scotland, (a.d. 1459.) The seals of two of 
tho Fitz-Alans, Earls of Arundel, severally a.d. 1375 and 1397, 
have as Supporters, the former two lions, and the latter two 
griffins ; and these animals regularly support— that is, they hold up 
the crested helms above the shield, No. 707 a, p. 271, and No. 707, 
Chap. XXIV. This series of progressive examples might easily bo 
carried on, until it would merge into the illustration of the sys- 
tematic use of true Supporters in the middle of the fifteenth cen- 
tury. The seals of George Plantagenet, Duke of Clarence, of 
Edmund de Mortimer, Earl of March, and of the accomplished 
and unfortunate John Thtoft, Earl of Worcester, all about a.d. 
1470, form a uniall group of admirable examples of Achievements 
of Arms having Supporters. 

The seal of Joh'es D'ns de Segrave— the Segrave of Caerla- 
verock— has his shield charged with a lion rampt. crowned, and on 
either side of the shield is a garb : thus a Badge is introduced into 
this composition in such a manner as to render it a prototype of 
Supporters. In tho next century, Richard de Beauchamp (died 
in 1439) has his quartered shield of Beauchamp and Neicburgh 



Digitized by Google 



KNOTS AND MOTTOES. 



279 



(Nos. 367 and 368) supported by his famous Badges, two chained 
bears with ragged staves. At the close of this fifteenth century, the 
monumental chantry of Abbot Ramryoe at St. Alban's abounds in 
admirable examples of Supporters, a truly characteristic speci- 
men of which I have engraved in No. 623, PL LXXVII. : See 
Rebus in Chap. XIII. and see also Chap. XXX. I may here 
refer to the singular inanimate canting Supporters which appear 
upon the Seal of William, Lord Bottreaux (a.d. 1426); the 
Shield couche*o, charged with a Griffin segreant and surmounted 
by a helm and crest, is supported on either side by an architectural 
buttress, in evident allusion to the noble bearer's name. 

In Scottish Heraldry, Supporters, originally entitled " Bearers," 
appear at about the same period as may be assigned to their ap- 
pearance in England ; and they were developed for the most 
part under the same conditions, the almost only marked distinc- 
tion being a comparatively more frequent use of a single Sup- 
porter in the earliest examples. Thus, on several Scottish seals 
of the close of the thirteenth century, the shield of arms is dis- 
played upon the breast of an eagle ; as on the seal of Alexander 
Stuart, Earl of Menteith, a.d. 1296. David Lindsay, Earl of 
Crawford, a.d. 1345, has a similar seal; and in 1366, and 1394, 
the seals of Margaret Stuart, Countess of Angus, and of Euphe- 
mia Leslie, Countess of Ross, display three shields charged upon 
the breast and wings of an eagh displayed. Many other varieties of 
single Supporters were in use at the same period. A second seal 
of the Earl of Crawford, which is considered to bear the earliest 
known Scottish Crest — a swans head and neck issuing from between 
two tall wings, rising erect from a crest-coronet— also appears to fur- 
nish the earliest example of regular Supporters, two lions ; the 
shield itself bears two coats quarterly. Two griffins are the 
Supporters on the seal that takes rank as second in chronological 
succession— that of Sir Thomas Ekskine, a.d. 1364. Upon the 
seal of Wm. Ruihven, a.d. 1396, a tree growing up from a mount 
appears on each side of the shield. Savage men frequently act as 



Digitized by Google 



280 



BALGES, CRESTS, SUPPORTERS, 



Supporters of Scottish shields, as do animals taken from the charges 
of the shields themselves ; and various human and allegorical 
figures dischargo similar duties. A few Scottish Supporters are 
allusive after such a fashion as this — two Conies for Cunningham, 
Earl of Glencairn, and for Lord Oliphant two elephants. The 
Secretum of King James I., a.d. 1429, is the earliest example of 
Supporters grouped with a Royal Scottish shield ; these Sup- 
porters are two lions, the unicorn, which now is held to be em- 
phatically the Royal Supporter of Scotland, not appearing, ex- 
cept in the coinage, before the time of Mary Stuart. 

In Chapter XIX., Section 3, 1 have described the changes 
that have taken place in the Royal Supporters of England ; this 
section of this present Chapter I conclude with a few examples, 
which will show of what character are the various figures 
that are still in use as Supporters to the Arms of British Peers. 

Somerset, Duke of Bkaufort : — Dexter ; A pantlier arg., spotted 
of various colours, fire issuant from his mouth and ears ppr., gorged 
with a plain collar, and chained or : Sinister ; a icyvern, wings 
addorsed, vert, folding in the mouth a sinister hand couped at the 
wrist gu. 

Graham, Duke of Montrose .— Two storks org., beaked and 
membered gu. 

Campbell, Duke of Argyll : — Two lions rampt. guard gu. 

Wellesley, Duke of Wellington .—Two lions gu., each gorged 
with an Eastern crown, and chained or. 

Chanlos Grenvjlle Nugent Temple, Duke of Buckingham : — 
Dexter ; a lion per fesse embattled or and gu. : Sinister ; a horse 
arg., seme'e of eaglets sa. 

Stafford Jermingham, Baron Stafford Dexter ; a lion rampt. 
or : Sinister ; a swan (from the De Bohuns) arg., beaked and legged 
sa., ducally gorged per pah gu. and of the second. 

Neville, Earl of Abergavenny :— Two bulls arg., pied sa., armed, 
unguled, collared and chained, and at the ends of the chains two 
staples or. 



KNOTS AND MOTTOES. 



281 



Gascoyne Cecil, Marquess of Salisbury -.—Two lions erm. The 
same Supporters are also borne by the Marquess of Exetek. 

Stanley, Earl of Derby : — Dexter ; a griffin : Sinister ; a hart ; 
both or, and ducally gorged and chained az., the hart attired of the last. 

Courtenay, Earl of Devon .—Two boars arg., bristled, tusked, 
and unguled or. 

Cavendish, Duke of Devonshire: — Two stags ppr., attired or, 
each gorged with a garland of roses org. and az., barbed vert. 

Gordon Lennox, Duke of RICHMOND : — Dexter ; an unicorn arg., 
armed, maned, and unguled or: Sinister; an antelope arg., armed 
and hoofed or, each Supporter gorged with a collar componee arg. 
and gu. 

St. Maur, Duko of Somerset : — Dexter ; an unicorn arg., armed, 
maned and tufted or, gorged with a ducal collar per pale az. ami gold, 
to which is affixed a chain of the last : Sinister ; a bull az., ducally 
gorged, chained, armed and hoofed or. 

Spencer, Earl Spencer : — Dexter; a griffin per fesse erm. and 
ernunots, gorged with a collar hating its edges fieurie counter-fleurie 
sa., charged with three escallops arg., aad chained of the third: 
Sinister ; a wyvcrn, erect on his tail, erm., collared and chained as 
the griffin. 

Granville Leveson Gower, Duke of Sutherland: — Dexter; 
a wolf arg., collared and lined or : Sinister ; a savage man, wreathed 
about the temples and the waist with laurel, Iwlding in his dexter hand 
a chd), resting on his shoulder, all ppr., and with his sinister hand 
supporting an ancient shield of Sutherland,-— that is, gu., three 
midlets or, within a bordure gold, charged with a tressure of Scotland. 

SECTION IV. 

MOTTOES. 

The Motto, or Mot — the brief significant saying of a family, 
which in battle would be their war-cry, appears to have been 
habitually associated by tho early Heralds with the Ridge, and 
also sometimes with the Crest of its owner. 



Digitized by Google 



282 



BADGES, CRESTS, SUPPORTERS, 



The present usage is to place the Motto upon a Scroll or 
ribbon, below the shield of arms ; and modern Heralds generally 
consider that the Motto-Scroll forms both a convenient and a 
sufficiently secure standing-place for Supporters, when Sup- 
porters appear with any Achievement. The tincture of the Motto- 
Scroll has not been determined by any rule or precedent : it is 
usually white, lined with pink or blue, but it might (at any rate 
in many instances) be advantageously assimilated to the tincture 
of the field of the shield. AVhen the Motto has direct reference 
to the Crest, it ought always to be represented as placed either 
immediately above the Crest itself, or (which is the better arrange- 
ment) immediately below it. The Motto may be charged upon 
a garter, and this may be made to encircle a Shield of Arms or a 
Crest, or Badge, should either of these cognizances be blazoned 
alone. 

In the middle ages, Mottoes associated with various heraldic 
devices were constantly employed for decoration. In those days, 
in addition to other uses of Mottoes, it was not uncommon for 
the blade of the knightly sword to be charged with some ex- 
pressive legend, motto-like in its character. Thus the famous 
weapon of the great Earl of Shrewsbury was taught to tell its 
own tale in the words — sufficiently good Latin to make their 
meaning intelligible — 

Sum Titlboti pro vincere inimico* meot : 
(I am Talbot's to conquer my enemies.) 

A somewhat similar, but a more loyal Motto was adopted 
by the good knight, De Setvans, who bore tcinnotcing fans as his 
armorial insignia : — 

Sic diw'pabo inimicos Regis tneL — (So will I scatter — that is, 
like chaff before the wind — the enemies of my king). 

As examples of Mottoes, I must be content to adduce the fol- 
lowing small group, which I have selected with a view to illus- 
trate Mottoes of different varieties. 

England : — Dicu el won Droit. (God and my right.) 



Digitized by Google 



KNOTS AND MOTTOES. 283 

Order of the Garter :—Honi soit qui mat y pense. 

Order of the Bath . — Tria juncta in uno. (Three— naval, mili- 
tary and civil — united in one.) 

Order of the Thistle :— (The Badge is a Thistle), Nemo me 
impune lacessit. (No one injures me with impunity). 

Neville: — Ne vile Velis. (Form no mean wish; or, Desire 
Neville.) 

Fortescoe : — Forte scutum, solus ducum. (The safety of the 
chiefs is a strong shield ; or, Fortescue is the safeguard of the 
chiefs.) 

Cholmoxdeley :— (Two helms are borne on the shield) ; Cassis 
tutissima virtus. (Valor is the safest helm.) 

Birtie : — (Three battering-rams are borne on the shield, No. 
129 c) ; Virtus ariete fortior. (Valor is more powerful than a bat- 
tering-ram.) 

Major Henniker : — (Three columns are borne in the arras) : 
Deus major Columna. (God the greater column, or support). 
Hepburn : — Keep Tryste. 

Scott of Thirlstano :— (With a Crest formed of a group of 
lances) ; Beady, aye ready. No. 519 a, PI. XXXVI. 

Clifford : — Semper paralus. (Always prepared.) 

Stuart : — Arant. (Forward). 

Percy : — Esperance. 

Bruce :—Doe well and doubt not. 

Russell :— Che sara, sara. ( U hat will be, will be.) 

Grey, Earl of Stamford : — A ma puissance, (By my might.) 

Temple: Templa quam dilectal (How beloved are the Tern- 
pies!) 

Hood .—Zealous. (Captain Hood commanded the " Zealous " 
at " the Nile.") 

Leslie: — Grip fast, — so said Bartholomew Leslio to Margaret 
of Scotland, as she clung to his girdle, when ho saved her from 
drowning. 

Lindsay .—Astra Castra, Numen lumen. (The Stars my canopy. 



Digitized by Google 



284 



BADGES, CRESTS, SUPPORTERS, 



Providence my light. The Crest, a military tent, and mullets 
home on the shield.) 

Spring Rice, Baron Monteagle : — Alte feri aquila. (The eagle 
soars aloft. Two eagles arc the Supporters.) 

Cavendish :— Cavcndo tutus. (Safe through Caution.) 

Home :— Vise a la Jin. (Look to the end— to Home.) 

SECTION V. 

KNOTS. 

Amongst tho devices that were used as Badges in early 
Heraldry, certain intertwined cords, distinguished by the title 
of Knots, may be considered to form a small distinct class of 
heraldic figures. 

A Knot, probably designed to convey the idea of a Mono- 
gram, appears amongst tho various devices with which the robe 
of Anne of Bohemia in her effigy at Westminster is diapered : it 
is represented in No. 514, PI. XXX. 

The following are the other varieties of Knots that occur in 
blazon : — 

Tho Stafford Knot:— No. 615, PI. XXX. 

ThE Bourchieu Knot :— No. 516 ; also No. C95, p. 285. 

Tho Heneage Knot: — No. 517. 

Tho Wake and Ormond Knot: — No. 518, (formed from the 
initials W and 0 intertwined). 

The Bowen Knot:— No. 519, (formed of four bows). 

The Lacy Knot, which is a rather intricate but an elegant 
interlaced cord, that thus forms a Rebus of tho name, Lacy. 

Knots sometimes form Badges in combination with other 
devices : thus, the Badge of the Dacres is formed by a cord 
entwined about an escallop-shell and a ragged staff, No. 513, PI. 
XXXIX : in this manner, a compound Badge may significantly 
indicate the union of two families. Another example is the 
Badge of Edward, Lord Hastings, which is produced by a similar 
process for tying together a sickle and a garb. 



CRESTS. KNOTS, fc? 




. v . 



Digitized by Google 



KNOTS AND MOTTOES. 



285 



The Stafford Knot is repeated again and again, in association 
with no less than eighteen Badges of the House of Stafford 
(which descends by no less than ten different marriages from the 
Royal Blood of both England and France,) upon the curious 
marble mural slab in the Chapel of St. Edmund in Westminster 
Abbey— the memorial of John Paul Howard, Earl of Stafford, 
who died in the year 1762. 

The Bourchier Knot I have shown (p. 115,) to have been used 
to decorate the mantlings of one nobleman of the Bourchier 
family; upon the monument of another Bourchier at West- 
minster, this Bame Knot is several times repeated, engraved in 
brass, and attached to a coudiere — the piece of armour that was 
used to protect the elbow joint, in the panoply of the second half 
of the thirteenth century, No. 695. 




No. 695. — Bourchief-Knot and Coudierc, or Elbow-guard: Brass in St- 
Edmund's Chapel, Westminster Abbey, to Sir Humphrey Boubciiikk, killed 
at Barnct a.d. 1471. 



No. 314. — Standard of Heniiy Plantagenet, of Bolingbroke. 



CHAPTER XVIII. 

FLAGS. 

From a very early period Heraldic Devices have been embla- 
zoned upon Flags of various kinds ; and similar Devices have 
also been frequently used without any Flag properly so called, to 
discharge the duty of military and official standards. 

Symbolical Figures we know to have formed the Standards 
of the Egyptians and Assyrians. Their own heraldic monster, 
the Dragon, has been the national Ensign of China from time 
immemorial. The Eagle is identified with the very name of 
Rome. Of the Flags of our own country, the Bayeux Tapestry 
of the Conqueror's Consort has preserved for us some of the 
earliest authentic examples. These are for the most part small 
in size, and they generally terminate in three points. They 
bear simple and indeed rude Devices, such as**a Pale, or a Pale 
and three Bars, or some form of Cross, with a group of Roundles, 
generally three in number; Nos. 526, 527, PL XXIX. A figure 
of a Dragon was in use by the Saxons at the time of the Conquest, 
No. 223 a, PL XII., and it appears to have been retained amongst 



Digitized by Google 



FLAGS. 



287 



their Ensigns of War by the early Norman Princes. In the 
twelfth and thirteenth centuries repeated mention is made of 
Car Standards, which were of such ample dimensions that they 
required to be displayed from a species of car, which also con- 
veyed them from place to place. 

I. 'With the Crusades, when Heraldry began to assume a 
definite form, Flags became subject to established rules. The 
earlier Saintly Ensigns, which were simply portraitures of such 
popular Personages as St. Cuthbert of Durham, St. Peter of 
York, and St. John of Boverley, still were displayed, as of yore ; 
but the regular Military and National Ensigns in the thirteenth 
and fourteenth centuries were more strictly heraldic, and each 
had its own proper signification. The three principal varieties 
of these mediaeval Ensigns were the Pennon, the Banner, and 
tho Standard. 

1. The Pennon was small in size, pointed or swallow-tailed at 
the Fly, and borne immediately below the Lance-head of the 
knight whose personal Ensign it was. It was charged with tho 
Badge, or other armorial Device of the Bearer, and sometimes 
richly fringed with gold. The Devices were charged upon the 
Pennon in such a manner, that they would appear in their 
proper positions when the weapon was laid for the Charge. The 
Brass to Sir J. D'Aubernoun, a.d. 1279, affords a good example 
of this symbol of Knightly Rank; No. 310, PI. XXIX. Other 
early examples of Pennons occur in the Elsyng Brass to Sir 
Hugh de Hastings, and in tho well-known illumination in the 
Louterell Psalter. 

2. The Banner was square in form, or nearly so, and was 
charged with the Coat of Arms of the owner, and not with any 
other Device. It was borne by Knigltis Bannerets, who ranked 
higher than tho Knights of tho Mediceval Chivalry, and also by 
Barons, Princes, and Sovereigns themselves. A Pennon with 
its points torn off would make, or at any rate would represent, 
a Banner ; and this was the form of ceremonial observed when a 



Digitized by Google 



288 



FLAGS. 



Knight, in reward for his gallantry, was advanced to the rank of 
of Banneret on the field of battle by the Sovereign himself, 
present in person, under his own Royal Bannor displayed. 

The Roll of Caerlaverock gives the Blazon of tho Banners of 
nearly one hundred of the Nobles and Bannerets who were 
present with Edward I. in his Campaign against Scotland in 1300. 
The first on tho Roll is tho Banner of Henry de Laci, who is 
thus introduced by tho Chronicler : — 

" Henry, the good Earl of Lincoln, burning with valour, which 
is the prevailing sentiment of his heart, tho Leader of the First 
Division, had a Banner of yellow silk with a purple Lion 
rampant;" No. 528, PL XXXV. 

Tho Brass to Sir Symon de Felbryge, K.G., has preserved 
an example of a Royal Banner. It is that of Richard II., to 
whom Sir Symon (as tho inscription at his feet declares) was 
Banner-Bearer. It shows the Royal Arms quartering France 
and England, and impaled with tho arms of the Confessor; 
No. 529, PL XXXV. 

(For further notices of Royal Banners, see Chap. XIX., Sec 2.) 

The Banner, it will bo observed, was the Ensign of both the 
Banneret himself, and of his own retainers and followers, and 
also of tho Division of an army that was under his command. 

In the early days of Heraldry, Bannerets of high rank appear 
occasionally to have borne Banners charged with insignia alto- 
gether different from their Shields of Arms. Thus Simon de 
Montfort, Earl of Leicester (temp. Hknry III.), whose shield 
is, gu., a lion rampt. arg., the tail fourchee, bears a Banner per pale 
indented arg. and gu., the tinctures of his shield. This Banner is 
considered to refer to ono of the great Baron's many lordships, 
the Honour of Hinkley in Leicestershire : (see Introduction to 
Sir Harris Nicholas' RoU of H. Z2T., p. xiii.) 

Banners were in use in the middle ages at sea, as well as on 
land ; and in addition to these regular Ensigns, it was a pre- 
vailing custom to emblazon the sails of the shipping of those days 



Digitized by Google 



L'AKCE PIrAGS, PEXNONS, STANDARDS. &amp; c 

CnAFTTRo XIV XVIH 




Fs^t: jcx:&gt;: 



Digitized by Google 



FLAGS. 



280 



with armorial insignia, and thus the sails themselves became 
Flags, as in No. 530, PI. XXXV. Many equally curious and 
interesting illustrations of this practice occur in early seals. 

During the times of the Tudors, and indeed towards the close 
of the Plantaqenet era also, the Banners of Princes and Nobles 
displayed many quarterings, but they retained their distinctive 
character in being identical in their blazoning with shields of 
arms. Two remarkable examples of those Banners are carved 
in bold relief, as accessories of the monument of Lunovic Robsart, 
K.G., in Westminster Abbey : these Banners wrought in stone 
have four quarterings, and their staves are so adjusted that they 
form mouldings of the canopy-shafts, while at tho base of the 
monument they are hold by a lion and a falcon. In the Heralds' 
College numerous curious drawings of Banners are preserved, 
all of them having their staves held by some Supporter, while the 
Banners of Nobles and Princes are represented as being ensigned 
with Coronets of ample size. 

3. The Standard, in use in the reign of Edward III., and in 
especial favour in the times of the Tudors, was of large dimen- 
sions, and always of considerable length in proportion to its 
depth, and tapering towards the extremity ; and it was divided 
per J 'esse into two tinctures. (See p. 128, and Nos. 312, 315, 
316, PL XXIX.) Standards were also generally divided bend- 
wise into compartments by Motto-Bands — that is, by Bands 
charged with some Motto of the owner: these Standards also 
varied in their size in accordance with the rank of the personage 
to whom they belonged. No. 313 in Plate XXXV. represents 
the ship standard of the Earl of Warwick, noticed at p. 120. 
And No. 314, p. 286, is one of tho Standards of Henry Plan- 
tagenet, of Bolingbroke, (emblazoned in Ilarleian MS., 4632), 
which is a peculiarly characteristic example of the heraldic flags 
of the middle ages; it is per f esse arg. and az. y the livery colours 
of the Lancastrians, having at tho head the Cross of St. George, 

and semee of Badges of Prince Henry, red roses, the De Bohun 

u 



Digitized by Google 



290 



FLAGS. 



white swan, goldsn wood-stocks (or roots of trees,) and fox's tails 
proper. Standards appear to have been used solely for the purpose 
of display, and to add to the splendour of military gatherings 
and royal pageants. 

In a " Book of Standards," (a.d. 1590, in Coll. Arm.), one 
example of Edward IV. is per /esse az. and gu., fringed arg. and . 
vert ; it has at the head the Cross of St. George, followed by a 
white lion pass, guard, royally crowned, the motto — Dieu et mon 
Droyt, and twelve roses, six gules in chief, and six arg. in base, 
all of them irradiated. Another Standard of the same Prince, is 
seme*o of white roses; and a third has one very large white 
rose-en-soleil and eight smaller ones. Upon a field arg. and az., 
semie of red roses, Henry V. displays bis chained antelope. 
Henry VII. has his banners arg. and vert, seme'e of red and white 
roses, with a dragon gu. (See also Excerpia Historica.) 

II. The National Banners of England, Scotland, and Ireland 
are severally the Crosses of St. George, St. Andrew, and St. Patrick, 
Nos. 60, 61, 62, PI. III. From the Crosses of St. George and 
St Andrew in combination, the First 44 Union Jack," No. 63, 
p. 26, was formed, and declared to bo the National Ensign of 
Great Britain by James I., April 12, 1606. 

The era of the Second 44 Union Jack," No. 64, p. 26, the glorious 
Flag that we now know as 44 tfa Flag of England," dates from 
the commencement of the present century. It is a combination 
of the three Crosses, Nos. 60, 61, 62. 

The Standards of the Middle Ages are evidently the proto- 
types of English Ensigns of later times. These Ensigns, three in 
number, their tinctures, Bed, White, and Blue, were first can- 
toned with the Cross of St. George, No. 531, PI. XXXVI. ; then 
the 44 St. George " was superseded by the first Union Jack, 
No. 532 ; and finally, when the present 44 Jack " was adopted, 
it took the place of its predecessor in the National Ensigns, 
where it still remains. The 44 White Ensign," however, now is 
not a plain white Flag, but a 44 St. Georgo " cantoned with the 



Digitized by Google 




Digitized by Google 



FLAGS. 



291 



« Jack :" Nob. 533, 534, 535, PL XXXVI. The 14 White n and 
the " Blue Ensigns " are restricted to the Royal Navy and the 
Yacht Clubs, the c&lt; Red Ensign" being in universal use as the 
" Ensign of England." This same Red Ensign has also been 
worn by the Red Squadron of the Royal Navy, as the White 
and the Blue Ensigns have severally been the distinctive insignia 
of the White and the Blue Squadrons. Early in the present 
year (1864), however, by the authority of the Lords of the 
Admiralty, and with the sanction of the Crown, a very important 
and equally singular change has been made in the use and sig- 
nification of our national naval Ensigns. Hitherto the Navy has 
been divided into three «' Squadrons,'' the « Red," the " White," 
and the " Blue," under the orders of Admirals, Vice-Admirals, 
and Rear-Admirals, also distinguished by the same three Colours : 
the Flags of all " Admirals of the Red " have been plain red ; 
those of all " Admirals of the White " have been the St. George ; 
and the Flags of all Admirals of the Blue Squadron of the Royal 
Navy have been plain blue. The recent change has assigned the 
Blue Ensign to the "Naval Reserve;" and thus, the White 
Ensign has become the Ensign of the Royal Navy, and the Red 
Ensign is now the Flag of the Mercantile Marine. This new 
arrangement virtually abolishes the long-established and well- 
known " Squadrons " of the Navy and of the Admirals of England. 

The Flag of the Admiralty is red with a yellow anchor and 
cable set fesse-urise, No. 128, p. 39. 

Pendants, long and very narrow streamers, either rod, white, or 
blue, and charged at the head with a Cross of St. George, are the 
symbols of command in the Royal Navy, and indicate that a 
vessel is in commission, but commanded by an officer of lower 
rank than an Admiral. 

The Military Flags of England now in use may be grouped 
in the two grand Divisions of " Cavalry Banners;" (they are 
styled K Standards," but they are, and they ought to be entitled 
" Bannors "), and " Infantry Colours:* The Banners of the 

u 2 



Digitized by Google 



292 



FLAGS. 



Cavalry are small in size; their colour is determined by the 
colour of tho regimental Facings; they are charged with the 
Cypher, Number, peculiar Ileraldic Insignia, and the " Honours " 
(such significant words as " Waterloo," " Alma," " Sobraon," 
&amp;c.) of each Regiment. The Banners of the Household Cavalry, 
however, are all crimson, and are richly embroidered with the 
Royal Insignia of England. 

Every Infantry Regiment or Battalion of the Line has its own 
** Fair of Colours." Of these, one is the " Queen's Colour "—a 
u Union Jack" charged with some of tho regimental Devices 
the other is tho " Regimental Colour," and its Field is of the 
samo tincture as the Facings; it is cantoned with a small 
"Jack," and bears tho Cypher, Number, Device, Motto, and 
Honours of the Corps. At the first, each Infantry Regiment had 
one " Colour " only ; then there were three to each Regiment ; 
and in the Reign of Queen Anne tho 44 Colours " were reduced 
to their present number of a " Pair." Tho 44 Colours " of the 
Foot-Guards reverse the arrangement observed in the Line. 
Their 44 Queen's Colour " is crimson, either with or without a 
cantoned Jack, but, always charged with tho Royal Cypher and 
Crown, and the Regimental Devices. Tho 44 Regimental 
Colour" of the Guards is tho Union Jack. The Guards also 
have small 44 Company Colours." 

The Royal Artillery and the Rifles of tho Line have no 
Colours. 

The Volunteer Regiments have at present been left to deter- 
mine both whether they should carry 44 Colours," and also what 
should be the character of their 44 Colours " whenever they may 
decide to adopt them. What may be termed 44 the Volunteer 
Banner," is worthy of the Force. It is charged with the figures 
of an archer of tho olden time and a rifleman of to-day, with the 
admirable motto, 44 Defence, not Defiance" 

The Flags of England, it will be understood, are the Flags of 
tho entire British Empire. 



Digitized by Google 



No. 242. No. 247. No. 243. 

Roses of York and Lancaster. 



CHAPTER XIX. 

THE ROYAL HERALDRY OF ENGLAND. 
SECTION I. 

ARMS OP THE REIGNING SOVEREIGNS OF ENGLAND. 

Definite Heraldic Insignia have been assigned by more than 
one writer on English Heraldry to those Saxon Princes who 
ruled in England before the Norman era; the early shields, 
however, must be regarded simply as evidences of comparatively 
modern ingenuity, since the genuine Royal Heraldry of England 
unquestionably dates its origin from a period subsequent to 
the successful invasion of William of Normandy. Even the 
Heraldry of the Norman Sovereigns themselves can scarcely be 
accepted as altogether free from doubt or uncertainty. After 
the Conquest, William I. it said to have assumed the " Two 
golden Lions, or Leopards, of his Norman Duchy," as the Arms 
of his Kingdom of England; and these two lions (it does not 
seem necessary to retain their other probable title of " Leopards," 
see p. 57), are considered to have been borne by William's 
successors, until 1154; when, on his accession, Henry II. is 
supposed to have added the one golden Lion of Aquitaine, (in 
right of his Queen, Alianore of Aquitaine), to his own paternal 
and royal shield. Stephen is sometimes said to have borne on a 



Digitized by Google 



h 294 



THE ROYAL HERALDRY 



rod shield, three golden centaurs armed with bows and arrows, or 
" Sagittaries ;" it has been conjectured, however, that this idea 
may have arisen from the circumstance of the " Sagittary " 
having been Stephen's Badge, and that it was mistaken for his 
arms. Since the time of Henry II., the three golden lions upon a 
field of red have always been held to bo the Royal Arms of 
England. They have been associated with other devices, as will 
presently be seen ; but still in a peculiar sense, the " three lions 
passant quardant or" have been, as they still are, the u three 
Lions of England" It must be added, that Richard I. for some 
time after his accession retained the arms he had borne, as 
Count of Aquitaine, gules y two lions combattant or, as appears from 
his first Great Seal. After his return from the Crusade, Richard 
adopted the three lions, as they probably were borne by his 
father. 

As the Kingly office exalts a Sovereign Prince above all other 
ranks of men, so are the Royal Arms of a Sovereign distinguished 
in a peculiar manner from all other heraldio insignia. This 
distinction is clearly conveyed by the term Arms of Dominion. 
These arms thus symbolize the Royalty of a Prince Regnant, as 
well as declare his personal individuality. Accordingly, these 
Royal Arms are inseparable from the rank and office of Royalty ; 
and they can be borne, without some Difference, by no person 
whatever except the Sovereign. In the case of the Daughters 
of the Sovereign, until a comparatively recent period, it was 
held to be a sufficient distinction that the Royal Arms should be 
borno by them charged upon a lozenge, or impaled with the arms 
of their husbands. It must be distinctly understood, that 
Heraldic Law forbids the Royal Arms to be quartered, without 
some Difference, under any circumstances whatever — unless, 
indeed, the person quartering the Royal Arms might be able to 
advance a title to the Crown itself, as in the instance of Eliza- 
beth Plantaqenet, Queen of Henry VII. 

In the persons of Sovereigns, all minor ranks and titles are 



Digitized by Google 



OF ENGLAND, 



295 



merged in their Royalty; and, in like manner, whatever arms 
they may have borne before their accession, are merged in their 
Royal Arms and absorbed by them ; and no other arms can be 
quartered with the Royal Arms. 

Royal Consorts may impale the arms of the Sovereigns to whom 
they may have been united in marriage ; and a Sovereign may 
impale, on a separate shield, the arms of his or her Consort. 

The Modifications and Changes that have taken place, from 
time to time, in the blazonry of the Royal Shield of England, 
may be briefly described as follows : 

I. The Norman Princes, William L, William II., Henry I m 
and Stephen, a.d. 1066-1154: gules, two lions passant gvardant, in 
pale, or; No. 536, PI. LVIII. 

II. The Plantagenet Princes, Henry IX, Richard I., John, 
Henry III., Edward I., Edward II., and Edward III., till the 
thirteenth year of his reign, a.d. 1154-1340, gu., three lions pass, 
guard., in pale, or, No. 536 a, PI. LVIII. ; and No. 198, p. 61. 

The three lions appear on the second Great Seal of Richard I. ; 
on the Great Seals of John, Henry III., Edward I., (on the 
bardings of the King's charger, as well as on his shield), and 
of Edward II. ; and on the first and second Great Seals of 
Edward III. It is a singular circumstance, that the legends 
on the Great Seals altogether omit any notice of England and 
of England's Royal Estate, until the second Great Seal of 
Henry III., which for the first time bears the words— dei : 
gratia: anglie: rex: &lt;&amp;o. 

III. In consequenco of the claim advanced by Edward III., 
in the tenth year of his reign, to the Crown of France, the Royal 
Arms of the French Kings (No. 2, p. 12) were introduced, 
a.d. 1340, into the English shield, and (by what was then 
a new heraldic process) they were quartered with the Lions of 
England, and precedence in this heraldic, arrangement was given to 
the Fleurs de Lys, which wore charged upon the first and fourth 
quarters of the English shield, semee over their azure field, exactly 



296 



THE ROYAL HERALDRY 



as they were borne by the Sovereigns of France ; No. 536 b, 
PL LVIII. 

The third Great Seal of Edward III., published in England, 
Feb. 21, 1340, and the noble Seal which superseded it in the 
following June, both bear shields charged with France and Eng- 
land quarterly, the France being senile de lys. It is to be observed 
that Edward III. had placed a fleur de lys on either side of his 
first Great Seal, a.d. 1327. 

IV. The Plantagenet Princes, Edward III., Richard II., 
and Henry IV. (Lancastrian Plantagenet) during the earlier 
years of his reign, a.d. 1340 to about 1405 ; Quarterly : — 1 and 4, 
France Ancient (semee de lys); 2 and 3, England; No. 536 b, 
PI. LVIIX 

This quartered shield is blazoned in the Boll of Arms of the 
20th Edward III. ; and it appears upon the person of the King 
in the Brass to Sir Hugh Hastings at Elsyng, Norfolk, in the 
same year 1347. This shield also appears upon the Burghersh 
monument in Lincoln Cathedral, and it remains upon the 
monument of Edward III. himself at Westminster ; No. 536 b, 
PI. LVIII. ; and No. 286, Chap. XX. 

Upon his Great Seal, Richard II. retained the arms of his 
grandfather without any change; but elsewhere he delighted 
to associate with this shield the armorial insignia (No. 78, PI. I.) 
attributed to Edward the Confessor. Over the entrance to 
Westminster Hall the two shields appear on either side, admir- 
ably sculptured in bold quatre-foiled circles. Each shield rests 
upon a white hart lodged, and is supported by figures of angels. 
Sometimes Richard II. impaled his hereditary quartered shield 
with the arms of the Confessor. An example occurs in the 
Brass to Sir Symon de Felbryge, K.G., the King's Banner- 
Boarer, who is represented with the Royal Banner (impaled 
and quartered) resting or his arm ; No. 529, PI. XXXV., and 
No. 536 c, PI. LVIII. 

About tho year 1365, Charles V. of France, with a view 



Digitized by Google 



OF ENGLAND. 



297 



apparently to distinguish between bis own arms and tbo fleurs 
do lys borne by tbo English claimants of his crown, reduced the 
number of his fleurs de lys to three only. The same change was 
effected by Henry IV. in the 1st and 4th Quarters of the Arms 
of England ; and impressions of his Great Seal, taken in the 
years 1406 and 1409 exist, which bear the quartered arms, (on 
banners instead of shields), charged ictth three fleurs de lys only. 
This modification of the French shield, which bears three fleurs 
do lys only, is styled in Horaldry, " France Modern," and thus is 
distinguished from the shield som6e de lys, or 11 France Ancient" 
See Nos. 536 d, and 536 b, PL LVIIL 

V. The Lancastrian Plantagenet Princes, Henry IV., after 
the first few years of his reign, Henry V., and Henry VI. ; tho 
Yorkist Plantagenet Princes, Edward IV., Edward V., and 
Richard III. ; and the Tudor Sovereigns, Henry VIL, Henry 
VIII., Edward VI., Mary, and Elizabeth, about a.d. 1405 — 1603 ; 
Quarterly : — 1 and 4, France Modern ; 2 and 3, England ; No. 536 d, 
PI. LVIII. 

Queen Elizabeth also sometimes bore Ireland, No. 537 a, PI. 
XL VI. Thus, in her Funeral Procession tho Banner of Ireland 
is associated with the Banners of Wales, Chester, and Cornwall ; 
(Vetust. Mon. iii., 18, &amp;c.) See also Section 7 of this Chapter. 

Edward IV. sometimes quartered the arms of the Confessor with 
France and England quarterly. Many fine original examples of 
the quartered shield of France Modern and England are still pre- 
served. Amongst the most characteristic, in addition to thoso 
upon seals, are the shields in King's College Chapel, Cambridge, 
upon the Percy shrine at Boverley Minster, and upon the monu- 
ments of Henry VII. and of his mother, in Westminster Abbey. 
In a very few instances this shield may be observed quartering 
England and France instead of France and England— having Eng- 
land, that is, in the 1st and 4th quarters: such a shield is in tho 
south porch of Gloucester Cathedral, which was built between 
the years 1420—1437. 



Digitized by Google 



208 



THE ROYAL HERALDRY 



When James I. ascended the English throne, the arms of both 
Scotland and Ireland were incorporated into the Royal Shield 
of England. The arrangement then adopted involved Quarterly 
quartering. The arms of Scotland are blazoned in No. 103, PI. V. ; 
and those of Ireland are, azure, a Harp or, stringed argent, No. 
537 A, PL XLVI. For a Paper on the Origin of the Treasure of 
Scotland, see Archceologia, xxx., 388 ; and for a Paper on the 
Harp of Ireland, see Notes and Queries, Series 1, xii., pp. 328 — 
350 : also see Seton's Heraldry of Scotland, p. 425. Fine ex- 
amples of the Royal Shield of the Stuarts appear npon the plinth 
of the Statue of Charles I., at Charing Cross, and in the second 
quadrangle of St. John's College, Oxford. 

VI. The Stuart Princes, James I., Charles I., Charles II., 
and James II., a.i&gt;. 1603—1689, Quarterly ;— 1 and 4 Grand 
Quarters, France Modern and England quarterly ; 2nd Grand Quarter, 
Scotland; 3rd Grand Quarter, Ireland; No 537, PI. LVIIL, 
from the Stuart Monuments in Westminster Abbey. 

Jn Scotland precedence has frequently been given to the Scot- 
tish insignia in the National Arms, in Seals, Banners, &amp;c. ; but 
certainly the same marshalling of the Royal Arms and their 
accessories ought to obtain, without any modification or differ- 
ence whatever, as well in North and South Britain as through- 
out the British Colonial Empire. See Seton, pp. 425—446. 

VII. William III. retained the same shield, but, as an eleded 
King, he placed upon it in pretence his paternal arms of Nassau, 
az., billetee, a Lion rampant or, No. 538, PL XLVII. Mary bore 
the Stuart shield; and, during her lifetime, the Royal Arms 
appeared impaled , to denote the joint sovereignty of the King 
and Queen. The Royal Shield, accordingly, was charged on 
both the Dexter and the Sinister half with the same Stuart arms, 
those on the Dexter having Nassau in pretence; No. 539, PL 
L I X., from the Great Seal. 

William and Mary ascended the throne, Feb. 13, 1689. Mary 
died, Dec. 28, 1694, when William bore No. 539 a. PL LIX. 



Digitized by Google 



OF ENGLAND. 



290 



On her accession, a.p. 1702, Anne bore the Stuart arms 
No. 537, PI. LVIII., and retained them until the union with 
• Scotland, May 1, 1707, when another change took place in the 
Royal blazonry. 

VIII. The Stuart Queen Anne, a.d. 1707—1714: Quarterly: 
— 1 and 4, England impaling Scotland; 2, France Modern; 3, 
Ireland. The shield upon the Great Seal adopted on the occa- 
sion of the Union with "Scotland, bore only England impaling 
Scotland. In this impalement the Tressure of Scotland extends 
only to the chief, sinister side, and base of the field. The ex- 
ample, No. 540, PI. LIX., is from the shield upon the base of 
the statue of Queen Anne, before St. Paul's Cathedral; other 
good examples are at Blenheim Palace. 

The Succession of the House of Hanover led to a place 
being assigned for the Arms of Hanover in the Royal Shield of 
England. The Arms of Hanover are thus blazoned : Per pale 
and per chevron : 1, gules, two Lions passant guardant, in pale, or, 
for Brunswick, (the same as the Norman Shield of England) ; 

2, or, seme'e of Hearts, a Lion rampant azure, for Lunenburoh ; 3, 
gules, a Horse courant argent, for Westphalia ; and, over all, an 
inesculcheon gules, charged with the golden Crown of Charlemagne; 
No. 541, PI. XLVII. 

IX. The Sovereigns of the House of Hanover, Georoe I., 
George II., and George III., from August 1, 1714, till January 
1, 1801. Quarterly: — 1, England impaling Scotland; 2, France; 

3, Ireland; 4, Hanover ; No. 542, PI. LIX. ; from the tympanum 
of the portico of the Church of St. Martin-in-the-Fields, London. 
In this composition one half only of the 1st quarter is assigned 
to the Lions of England. 

Upon the first of January, 1801, by Royal Proclamation, the 
French fleurs de lys were removed from the Arms of England, 
and the Royal Shield of England assumed the general aspect 
with which we have long been familiar. 

X. The Sovereigns of the House of Hanover, George III., 



Digitized by Google 



aoo 



THE ROYAL HERALDRY 



George IV., and William IV., from January 1, 1801, till June 
20, 1837 ; Quarterly :—X and 4, England ; 2, Scotland ; 3, Ireland ; 
and over all in pretence, Hanover. From 1801 till 1816, the Inos- 
cutcbeon of Pretence was ensigned by Georoe III. with the 
Electoral Bonnet of Hanover, No. 542 a, PI. LXXVI. ; but from 
1816 till June 20, 1837, the same shield was ensigned with a 
Royal Crown ; No. 543, PI. LLX. 

XI. On the happy accession of Her Majesty, Queen Victoria, 
June 20, 1837, the Arms of Hanover were removed from the 
Royal Shield ; and thus the Royal Arms of England are now 
simply a combination of the insignia of the Three Realms of the 
United Kingdom, England, Scotland, and Ireland, as in No. 
543 a, Tl. LIX. This noble shield, I venture to suggest, 
might assume a still more impressive aspect, were a ship to 
appear in the fourth quarter, in place of the repeated lions, as the 
cognizance of the British Colonial Empire. From the time of 
Edward III., the shield charged with the Royal Arms of Eng- 
land has been encircled with the Charter, charged with the Motto of 
the Order. See Nos. 286, 289. 

In Plates LVHI., and LLX., I have placed before students of 
Heraldry the entire series of the Royal Shields of England, with 
the sole exception of that modification of No. 543, which would 
bo charged with the Electoral Bonnet of Hanover instead of an 
Imperial Crown. 

SECTION n. 

TITC ROYAL BANNERS OF ENOLAND. 

The Royal Banners of England have always borne the same 
blazonry as the Royal Shields. The earliest blazon of a Royal 
Banner of which I am aware, appears in the Roll of Caerlaverock, 
a.d. 1300. Tho Chronicler styles the animals "Leopards," and 
not Lions, (see p. 57); and he uses the descriptive epithet 
"cwrant" instead of passant. The Royal Banner of Edward I. 
tho Chronicler of Caerlaverock describes after this characteristic 



Digitized by Google 



THE HOVAIJ ARMS OF ENGLAND. 

CEAPTKH XIX 



A. D. 1066 to 1151 A D 1154 to 1340 




THE ROYAIi ARMS OF ENGLAND. 

OHATTFR X 7 X 

— . T 

VMLMAMm A MARY WILLIAM III 




v\.l&gt;. 1707 tulTlk A O 1714 to 1801 




A 1&gt; 1810 to 1837 - H M THE QUEEN 




Kate 1IX 



Digitized by Google 



OF ENGLAND. 301 

manner : " On his Banner were throe Leopards, courant, of fine 
gold, sot on red ; fierce were they, haughty and cruel, thus 
placed to signify that, like them, the King is dreadful to his 
enemies. For his bite is Blight to none who inflame his anger ; 
and yet, towards such as seek his friendship or submit to his 
power, his kindness is soon rekindled." 

Edward III. on his Standards placed his quartered shield at 
their head, and powdered them with Fleurs de lys and Lions, 
as in No. 312, PL XXIX. Drawings of many curious examples 
of both these Banners and Standards are preserved amongst 
the collections at the Heralds' College ; see p. 290). Several 
of the Sovereigns, in addition to the Banner of their Royal 
Arms, used other Banners and Standards charged with their 
Badges. It is to be observed that the Royal Banners of Arms 
charged their insignia upon their entire field, without any 
accessories, until tho time of the Stuarts, when tho Arms wero 
sometimes either associated with other Devices, or the Flag 
bore the entire Boyol Achievement charged upon the centre of its 
field. Curious examples of Royal Standards thus emblazoned 
appear in the pictures, now at Hampton Court, representing 
tho embarkation of Charles II., in 1G60, and of William III., in 
1688. More recently the Royal Banner has always displayed 
the Arms of England, after the early habit, blazoned over its 
entire field, and without any accessory. See Chap. XVIII. 

SECTION III. 

BOYAL SUPPORTERS. 

With tho Blazonry of the Royal Shield itself, tho Supporters, 
which appear on either side of it, as if discharging sentry 
duty, are habitually associated by the students of historical 
IIeraldry. 

Supporters are said to have been introduced by Edward III. ; 
the fact, however, is doubtful. The Supporters that have been 



Digitized by Google 



4 

302 



THE ROYAL HERALDRY 



assigned to Edward III., are a Lion and a Falcon. Two white 
Harts (Vincent, 152, f. 51, in Coll. Arm.), have been assigned to 
Richard II., if he can be considered to have borne them as true 
Supporters. A Lion and an Antelope, and also an Antelope and a 
Swan (f. 52), have been attributed to Henry IV., though with 
uncertain authority ; and there is some uncertainty about the 
Lion and AnteIope t that are said to have been the Supporters of 
the Arms of Henry V. After this reign the Supporters are as 
follows : 

Henry VI. Two Antelopes argent; sometimes the Dexter, a 
Lion ; the Sinister, a Panther, Antelope, or Heraldic Tiger. 

Edward IV. Dext., a Lion or; Sin., a Bull sa., (Vinct. 152, 
f. 53) : also a Lion arg., or two Lions org., or a Hart arg. 

Edward V. Dext., a Lion arg. ; Sin., a Hart org., gorged and 
chained or. 

Richard III. Dext., a Lion or ; Sin., a Boar arg. ; but more 
generally, two Boars arg. y (Vinct. 152, f. 54). 

Henry VII. A Dragon gu. and a Greyhound org., sometimes 
the one and sometimes the other being the Dexter ; also, occa- 
sionally, two Greyhounds arg., as at the Bishop's Palace, Exeter : 
also, Dexter, a Lion or. ; Sin., a Dragon gu., (Vinct 152, f. 54). 
See the Achievements of Arms in King's College Chapel, Cam- 
bridge. 

Henry VIII. Generally, Dext., a Lion or ; Sin., a Dragon gu. 
Sometimes, Dext., a Dragon gu. ; and Sin., a Bull, a Greyhound, or 
a Cock, all argent. 

Edward VI. A Lion or, and a Dragon gu. 

Mary and Elizabeth. Dext., a Lion or ; Sin., a Dragon or, or 
a Greyhound arg. (Mary's shield when impaled is supported by 
an Eagle and a Lion.) 

James I. It Lion or, and a Unicorn arg. 

Two Unicorns had succeeded to two Lions as the Supporters of 
Scotland before Mary Stuart's son was born ; and the first Stuart 
King of Great Britain assumed, as his Supporters, a golden IJon 



Digitized by Google 



OF ENGLAND. 



303 



for England on the Dexter, and one of the silver Unicorns of Scotland 
on the Sinister side of his Shield. Upon the Monument of 
Queen Elizabeth at Westminster this order is reversed, the 
Unicorn being to the Dexter. 

The Supporters of the Royal Shield of England have remained 
unchanged since the time of James L They are now blazoned 
as follows : 

Dexter Royal Supporter: A Lion rampant guardant or, impe- 
rially crowned ppr. 

Sinister Royal Supporter : An Unicorn arg. y armed, unguled and 
crined or, gorged with a coronet composed of crosses patte'es and fleurs 
de lys gold, a chain affixed thereto of the last, passing between the fore- 
legs, and refiexed over the back. 

SECTION rv. 

ROYAL BADGES AND MOTTOES. 

At the head of the Heraldic Devices and Figures, adopted and 
borne by the Sovereigns of England as Badges, stands tho 
Planta Genista — that simple sprig of Broom-plant, which gave a 
name to one of the proudest and most powerful Families that 
ever rose to eminence amongst their fellow-men. The motive 
that induced Geoffrey of Anjou to assume as his cognizance the 
Sprig of Broom is uncertain, though very probably it had its 
origin in some religious sentiment ; the Device itself, however, 
its Latin name, and its associations, will live and be remem- 
bered so long as Heraldry exists, or History itself is held in 
esteem. The Effigy of Richard II. at Westminster, has the 
robes diapered with tho Planta Qenista, No. 210, PI. XII., and 
with other Badges of that unfortunate Prince. The Seal of 
Jaspar Tudor also has the field of the Seal itself diapered with 
the Planta Genista. 

Second only to the Planta Genista in interest are the White 
and Bed Roses of tho rival Plantagenets of York and Lancaster, 
(See pp. 75, 293, and PL XI II.) and tho famous Ostrich Feathers. 



304 



THE ROYAL HERALDRY 



Badges: Henry II. The Broom, showing the leaves and seed- 
pods of the plant : an Escarbuncle : a Sword : and an Olive- 
branch. 

Richard L A Star issuing from a Crescent, No. 544, PI. XLVIL: 
a Star and Crescent separately : a mailed Arm, the hand grasping a 
broken lance : a Sun on two Anchors, with the motto, 44 Christo Duee." 

John and Henry HX A Star issuing from a Crescent, No. 544, 
PL XL VII. 

Edward I. A Rose or, stalked ppr. 

Edward II. A Castle of Castile. 

Edward III. Bays descending from a Cloud : the Stock or Stump 
of a Tree, couped : a Falcon: a Griffin: an Ostrich Feather: a 
Fleur de lys : a Sword. 

Kichard II. An Ostrich Feather: the Sun behind a Cloud: 
the Sun in splendour : a white Hart lodged, ( from his mother, 
Joan of Kent, see No. 525) : the Stump of a Tree : a white 
Falcon. (Examples on his Effigy, and at Westminster Hall.) 

Henry IV. The Monogram SS : a Crescent; a Foxs Tail: a 
Stock or Stump of a Tree : an Ermine or Gennet : a croumed Eagle : 
a crotcned Panther : an Ostrich Feather : an Eagle displayed : a 
Columbine Flower : the Lancastrian red Bose, and the white Swan of 
the De BonuNs. 

Henry V. An Ostrich Feather: a chained Antelope : a cliained 
Swan: a Fire-Beacon. These Badges aro sometimes grouped 
together, as in the Monumental Chantry of the King at West- 
minster. 

Henry VI. A cliained Antelope : a spotted Panther : and two 
Ostrich Feathers in saltire. 

He first assumed as a regular Motto the ancient royal war 
cry of England, Dieu et mon Droit. 

Edward IV. A black Bull, (Clarence): a black Dragon, 
(Ulster) : a white Wolf and a white Lion, (Mortimer) : a white 
Hart : a Falcon and Fetter-lock : tlie Sun in splendour : a white 
Bose with Bays. 



Digitized by Google 



OF ENGLAND. 



305 



Richard III. A White Bose: the Sun in splendor: a White 
Boar : and a Falcon with a Virgin's Face, holding a White Erne. 

Henry VII. A Portcullis : a White Greyhound courant : a 
Bed Dragon, (Cadwallader) : a Dun Cow, (Warwick) : a Haw- 
thorn Bush royally crowned, with Cypher, h.r., No. 545, PI. XL VII. : 
a Bose of York and Lancaster, No. 248, PI. XIII. : and a crowned 
Fleur-delys. 

Henry VIII. A Portcullis : a Fleur-de-lys : a Bose of York and 
Lancaster : a White Cock : a While Greyhound courant. 

Catherine of Arragon had for Badges the Pomegranate, the 
Bose, and the Sheaf of Arrows ; (See the Monument of Prince 
Arthur Tudor, at Worcester). Annk Boleyn had a Falcon 
crowned and lidding a Sceptre ; Jane Seymour had a Phcenix rising 
from a Castle, between Tudor Boses ; and Katherine Parr had a 
Maiden's Head crowned, rising from a large Tudor Bose. 

Edward VI. The Sun in splendor, and the Tudor Bose. 

Mary. A Pomegranate: a Pomegranate and Bose conjoined: 
the Tudor Bose impaling a Sheaf of Arrows, ensigned with a Crown, 
and surrounded by Bays. She sometimes used as a Motto the 
words, " Veritas Temporis Filia." 

Elizarkth. The Crowned Falcon icith a Sceptre (of her mother), 
and the Tudor Bose, with the Motto, " Bosa sine spina." In addi- 
tion to the established Royal Motto, " Dieu et mon Droit," she 
often used as her own Motto, " Semper Eadem." 

James I. The Thistle, and the Bose and Tliistle dimidiated and 
crowned, No. 54G, PL XLVII., with the Motto, « Beati Pacifici." 

Charles I., Charles II., and James II. Tho same Badges as 
James I., without his Motto. 

Anne. A Bose-branch and a Thistle growing from one stalk, and 
crowned ; on the Great Seal of tho year 1707. 

From this time personal Badges ceased to be adopted; but 
tho Bose, Tliistle, and Shamrock, all of them imperially crowned, 
as the Badges of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and tho Motto, 
" Dieu et mon Droit," havo permanently taken their becoming 

x 



Digitized by Google 



806 



THE ROYAL HERALDRY 



parts in blazoning the Royal Achievement of England. The 
Red Dragon also, with his wings elevated, and passant upon a 
mount vert, is still the Royal Badge for the Principality of 
Wales. 

SECTION V. 

THE ARMS OF ROYAL CONSORTS. 

With the Royal Arms of the Reigning Sovereigns of England, 
the student of Historical Heraldry will frequently desire to asso- 
ciate those that were borne by the Consorts of these Sovereigns. 
They constantly occur in connection with those records of 
English History, of which Heraldry is at once the Chronicler 
and Illustrator. 

1. Matilda of Flanders : Gyronnh or and az., an inescutcheon gu. 

2. Matilda of Scotland : Scotland : No. 103, PI. V. 

3. Adelais of Louvain : Or, a Lion rampt. az., langued gu. 

4. Matilda of Bologne : Or, three torteaux. 

5. Eleanor of Aquitaine and Guyenne : Gu., a Lion passant guar- 
dant or. 

6. Beresoaria of Navarre : Az., a Cross arg., afterwards super- 
seded by Navarre Modem: See " Arms of Navarre " in Chap. 
XXXII. 

7. Isabel of Angouleme : Lozengy, or and gu. 

8. Alianore of Provence : Or, four Pallets gu. ; No. 7, PL I. 

9. Alianore of Castile: Quarterly, Castile and Leon; that is, 
1 and 4, gu., a Castle triple-towered or : 2 and 3, org., a Lion rampt. 
gu., No. 135, PL 1. She also bore Ponthieu, in right of her 
mother, and this shield on her monument at Westminster alter- 
nates with England and Castile and Leon. Ponthieu is, or, three 
Bendlets az., within a Bordure gu., No. 547, PL XLVII. On her 
seal, her Effigy stands between a Castle surmounting a Lion on 
her Dexter side, and on her Sinister side a Lion surmounting a 
Castle; the reverse has a shield of England suspended by its 
guige from a Tree. 



Digitized by Google 



OF ENGLAND. 



307 



10. Margaret of France : France Ancient dimidiated by England, 
No. 322, PI. XVIII. ; also a shield of England upon a seal, the 
field of which is semee de lys, No. 332 a, PI. LXXX. 

11. Is A belle of France : France Ancient dimidiating Navarre, 
(in right of her mother) : See Navarre in Chap. XXXII. She 
bore England on one shield, and France with Navarre on another ; 
see No. 335 a, and p. 152. 

12. Philippa of Hainauli : Quarterly, 1 and 4, or, a Lion rampt. 
sa., for Flanders ; 2 and 3, or, a Lion rampt. gu., for Holland : 
(See p. 159.) She bore these, her paternal arms, quartered with 
England only : No. 337, p. 159. Her arms were also impaled by 
England and by France and England quarterly. 

13. Anne of Bohemia: Quarterly; 1 and 4, Germany, arg., an 
Eagle displayed, with two heads, sa. ; 2 and 3, Bohemia, gu., a IAon 
rampant, queue fourchee, arg., crowned or. She impaled these arms 
with the shield of Richard II., upon which the arms of the 
Confessor were marshalled per pale with France and England ; 
consequently the complete shield would bo blazoned tiercee in 
pale, dc. ; No. 349, PI. XXIII. 

14. Isabel of France: France Modem: impaled, a.d. 1397, by 
Richard II. ; No. 350. This Impalement may be considered to 
have first suggested to Henry IV. the chango in his own arms 
from France Ancient to France Modern. 

15. Joanne of Navarre: Quarterly ; 1 and 4, Eureux, az., three 
fleurs de lys or ; over all, a Bendlet, compony arg. and gu. ; 2 and 3, 
Navarre ; see Navarre in Chap. XXXII. Impaled by Henry IV. : 
See monument at Canterbury, and Chap. XXII. 

16. Catherine of France : France Modern. Impahd by 
Henry V. 

17. Maroaret of Anjou : Quarterly of six :— 

1. Hungary : Barry of eight arg. and gu. 

2. Naples : France Ancient, with Label of three gu. 

3. Jerusalem : Arg., a Cross potent between four plain Crosses or. 

4. Anjou : France Ancient, within a Bordure gu. 

x 2 



Digitized by Google 



308 



THE ROYAL HERALDRY 



5. De Barre : Az., two Barbels haurient addorsed and crustily fitchte 
or, all within a Bordure gu. 

6. Lorraine : Or, on a bend gu., three Eaglets displayed arg. 
Impaled by Henry VI. : No. 352, PL XXI II. 

18. Elizabeth Widville, or Woodville : Quarterly of six : — 

1. Luxembourg: Arg., a Lion rampt. double tailed gu., crowned 
or; for Peter, Count do Luxembourg, her maternal grand- 
father. 

2. De Baux : Quarterly ; 1 and 4, gu., an Estoile of 1 6 rays arg. ; 
2 and 3, az. ; scmce de lys or ; for her grandmother, Margaret, 
daughter of Francis de Baux, Due d'Andr£e. 

3. Cyprus : Barry of ten arg. and az., over all a Lion rampt. gu. 

4. Ursins : Gu. t three Bendlcts arg. ; a Chief per fesse of the second 
and or, charged with a Rose of the first : for her great-grand- 
mother, Susan, daughter of the Count des Ursixs. 

5. St. Paul : Gu., three Pallets rnriie ; on a Chief or a Label of five 

m 

fiats y az • 

6. Widville : Arg., a Fesse and a Canton conjoined gu. 
Impaled by Edward IV. 

19. Anne Neville : Gu., a Saltire arg. ; differenced with a Label 
of three points company of the second and az. 

Impaled by Richard III. 

In the " Warwick Roll " she quarters, Bcaucltamp, Montagu, 
and Monihermer with Neville. 

20. Elizabeth of York: Quarterly; 1 and 4, Ulster, Or, a 
Cross gu. ; 2 and 3, Mortimer. 

Impaled by Henry VII. Emblazoned on the Monuments of 
the Countoss of Richmond, and of Henry VII. and Elizabeth of 
York, Westminster Abbey, No. 351, PI. XXIII. 

21. Catherine of Arragon : Quarterly ; 1 and 4, Grand QuarUrs, 
Castile and Leon, quarterly ; 2 and 3, Grand Quarters, Arragon, 
Or, four Pallets gu., impaling Sicily, per Saltire, 1 and 4, Arragon, 
2 and 3, arg., Eagle displayed sa., beaked and membcred gu. In the 
Base Point, the Badge of Grenada, org., a Pome/jranate slipped ppr. 



Digitized by Google 



OF ENGLAND. 



309 



Augmentation 



The Supporters of Queen Catherine of Arragon were a Lion and 
an Eagle. 

Impaled by Henry VIII. 

22. The Arms of Queen Anne Boleyn are the first which 
exemplify the usage, introduced by Henry VIII., of granting to 
his Consorts " Augmentations " to their paternal arms. It is a 
striking illustration of the degenerate condition of Heraldry 
under the second Tudor Sovereign. 

Anne Boleyn : Quarterly of six :— 
fl. Lancaster. 

2. Engoulesme, or Naples. 

3. GUYENNE. 

4. Quarterly, 1 and 4; or, a Chief indented az.,for Butler ; 2 and .*&gt;, 
org., Lion rampt. sa., crowned gu., for Rochfort. 

5. Brotuerton. 

6. Warrenne. 

Impaled by Henry VIII. (See the choir-screen of King's 
College Chapel, Cambridge.) 

Supporters : a Leopard, and a nude Griffin. 

23. Jane Seymour : Quarterly of six :— 

1. Or, on a Pile gu., between six Fleurs de lys az., three Lions of 
England. An Augmentation. 

2. Seymour. 

3. Beaucuamp of Eachc : Vairtc. 

4. Stuumy, or Esturmi : Arg., Viree demi-Lions rampt. gu. 

. r &gt;. Mac Williams: Per bend arg. and gu., three Bases, bendwise, 

counter changed. 
6. Coker : Arg., on a Bend gu., three Leopard's Heads or. 

Impaled by Henry VHL, and blazoned frequently at Windsor 
and Hampton Court. 

Supporters : A Lion and a Unicorn. 

24. Anne of Cleves : Qu., an Inescutcheon arg., over all, an Es~ 
carbuncle of eight rays or. 

Impaled by Henry VIII. 



Digitized by Google 



310 



THE ROYAL HERALDRY 



25. Catherine Howard : Quarterly:— 

1. Az., three Flairs de lys, in pale, or, between two Flanches erm., each 
charged with a Rose gu. 

2. Brotherton. 

3. Howard Modem. 

4. Az., two Lions of England; tite Verge of the Escutcheon charged 
with four half Fleurs de lys or. 

1 and 4 are Augmentations. 
Impaled by Henry VUL 

26. Catherine Parr : Quarterly of six :— 

1. Arg., on a Pile gu., between six Roses of the 2nd, three other Roses 
of the 1st. (Augmentation.) 

2. Arg., two Bars az., toithin a Bordure engrailed sa. 

3. Ross of Kendall : Or, three Waler-bougets sa. 

4. Marmion : Vairee, a fesse gu. 

5. Fitz Hugh : Az., three Chevrons, interlaced in base ; a Chief or. 
(y. Green : Vert, three Harts at gaze or. 

Impaled by Henry VIII. 

27. Philip, King of Spain. Tlie sams arms as those of Catherine 
of Arragon. (See 21.) Impaling the arms of Mary. 

28. Anne of Denmark. The arms borne by Anne, daughter of 
Frederick II., King of Denmark and Norway, are a complicated 
example of the elaboration of details held in such high esteem 
amongst the continental Heralds of comparatively recent times. 
These arms may be described as follows : A Cross gu., surmounted 
of another arg. In the Dexter Canton, or, seme'e of hearts ppr., 
three lions pass, guard, in pale az., crowned or, for Denmark ; in the 
sinister canton, gu., a lion rampt., crowned or, holding in his paws a 
battle-axe arg., for Norway ; in the dexter base quarter, az., three 
crowns ppr., for Sweden ; and in the sinister base quarter, or, ten 
hearts, 4, 3, 2, and 1, gu., in chief a lion pass, guard, az., for 
Jutland. In the base of the shield, beneath the Cross, the 
ancient ensign of tho Vandals, gu., a wyvern, its tail nmced and 
wings expanded or. Upon tho centre of the Cross an oscutcheon 



Digitized by Google 



OF ENGLAND. 



311 



of pretence, charged with Quarterly, 1 . Or, two lions pass, guard, 
az., for Sleswick ; 2. Gu., an inescutcheon, having a nail in every 
point thereof, in triangle, between as many holly-leaves, all ppr., for 
Holstein ; 3. Gu., a mean org., beaked sa., gorged with a coronet ppr., 
for Stormerk ; and 4, Az., a chevalier, armed at all points, brand- 
ishing his sword, his helm plumed, his charger arg., the trappings or, 
for Ditzmers. Over the whole, on an inescutcheon, or, two bars 
gu., for Olpenburgh, impaling for Dalmexhurst, az., a cross patee 
fitchee or. 

Borne on a separate shield, and marshalled with the Royal 
shield of James I. 

This shield, with some modification of its marshalling, (see 
Section 7 of this Chapter), is already well known and honoured 
in England, through tho auspicious and happy alliance between 
our own Prince of Wales, and the Princess Alexandra of Den- 
mark. 

29. Henrietta Maria of France : France Modern. This shield 
was sometimes borne impaled by St. George. 

Impaled by Charles I. A very fine example of this impaled 
shield is carved above one of tho archways in the inner 
quadrangle of St. John's College, Oxford. 

30. Catherine of Braganza : Arg. t on each of Jive escutcheons, in 
cross, az., as many plates, in saltire, the whole within a bordure gu., 
charged with eight castles or, for Portugal. 

Impaled by Charles II. 

31. Mary D'Este, of Modena: Quarterly :— 1 and 4, Este, arg., 
an eagle displayed sa., crowned or ; 2 and 3, Ferrara, az. three fleurs 
de lys or, within a bordure counterindented or and gu. 

Impaled by James II. 

32. Prince George of Denmark : Tho same as 28. 

33. The arms of the unhappy Consort of George I. do not 
appear ever to have been exhibited in England. As she was her 
husband's cousin, her arms were probably the same as those 
which he himself bore before his accession to the English crown. 



312 



THE ROYAL HERALDRY 



34. Caroline Wilhelmixa of Brandenburgh Anspach : Tlio arms 
of his Consort, impaled by George II., aro quarterly of fifteen 
pieces; the following blazon from German authorities differs 
in several particulars from that given, from a contemporary 
print, by Mr. Willement in his most excellent work on "Kegal 
Heraldry :"— 

Quarterly of fifteen :— 1. Magdeburg,^ feme gu. and org., each 
bordered: 2. Prussia: 3. Stettin, az., a griffin segreant gu., crowned 
or : 4. Pom era si a, arg., a griffin segreant gu. : 5. Wenden, arg., a 
griffin segreant bendy gu. and vert : 6. Cassuben, or, a griffin segreant 
sa. : 7 and 9, Crosses, arg., an eagle disp. sa. : 8. Halberstadt, 
per pale arg. and gu., bordered : 10. NUREMBERG, or, a lion rampt. 
sa,, crowned, within a bordure componSe arg. and'gu. : 11. Minden, 
gu., two keys in saltire arg. : 12. IIohenzollern, quarterly arg. and 
sa., bordered : 13. Halberstadt, per pale arg. and gu. : 14. Star- 
gard, per fesse gu. and or: 15. Gu., for right of Regalia: and, 
over all, on an inescutcheon, Brandenburgh, an?., an eagle disp. gu. 

Impaled by George II. 

35. Charlotte of Mecklenburgh Strelitz: Quarterly of 6: — 1. 
Mecklenburoh, or, a buffalo's head cabossed sa., armed arg., through 
the nostrils an annulet of the last, ducaJly crowned gu., the attire pass- 
ing through the crown: 2. Wenden, az., a griffin segreant or: 3. 
Schwerin Principality, per fesse az. and vert, in chief a griffin 
segreant or, the base bordered round the entire field arg. : 4. Ratz- 
buroh, gu., a cross couped arg., ducally crowned or : 5. Schwerin 
County, gu., an arm embowed, in armour to the wrist, issuing from 
clouds on the sin, side, and holding between the finger ami thumb a gem 
ring, all ppr., round the arm a riband tied az. : 6. Rostock, or, a 
buff (do 8 head in profile sa., armed arg., ducally crowned gu., over all 
an escutcheon of pretence, per fesse, gu. and or, for Stargard. 

Impaled by George III. 

36. Caroline, daughter of Charles Frederick William, Duke 
of Brunswick, K.G. The following blazon of the arms of 
Brunswick is from the German authorities, Spkner, Liebmacher 



Digitized by Google 



OF ENGLAND. 



313 



and Triers : in the 3rd, 5th, 7th, and Oth quarters, this Shield 
thus blazoned differs from tho Shield of tho Duko, which is 
displayed upon his Garter-Plate at Windsor. Quarterly of 
12:— 

1. Lunenburgh, or, semSe of hearts gu., a lion rampt. az. : 2. Bruns- 
wick, gu., two lions pass, guard, in pale or : 3. Eberstein, arg., a 
lion rampt. az., crowned gu. : 4. Homberg, gu., within a bordure com- 
ponce arg. and az., a lion rampt. or : 5. Diephold, az., a lion rampt. 
arg., crmoned or : G. Lauterbergh, gu., a lion rampt. or : 7. Hoja 
and Bruckhausen, Quarterly, 1 and 4, or, two bear's paws couped 
and addorsed in pale sa. ; 2 and 3, gyronny of eight arg. and az., a 
chief barry of four gu. and of the first : 8. Diephold, az., an eagle 
disp. arg., (or, very commonly, arg., an eagle disp. az.) : 9. Hohn- 
stein, or, two bars gu., a chief cheque' e arg. and gu. : 10. Regen- 
stein, arg., a stag's attire gu. 11. Clettenberg, arg., a stag trip- 
ping sa. : 12. Blanckenberg, arg., a stag's attire sa. : tho stag's 
attires in the 10th and 12th quartors are so disposed as to follow 
the contour of the escutcheon, and therefore they are either fa 
fesse or in bend, as the caso may be. 

Impaled by George IV. 

37. Adelaide of Saxe Meinengen. Quarterly of 9:— 1. Tuu- 
rinoia, az., a lion rampt. barry of eight arg. and gu., crowned or: 
2. Cleves, gu., an cscarbuncle of eight rays or, the rays issuing from 
an inescutcheon arg. : 3. Juliers, or, a lion rampt. sa., crowned gu. : 
4. Meissen, or, a lion rampt. sa., crowned gu. : 5. Saxony : 6. Berg, 
org., a lion rampt. gu. crowned or : 7. Westphalia, arg. an eagle 
displayed gu n crowned or : 8. Landesberg, or, two pales az. : 9. 
Thubinoia Pfalz, aa., an eagle displayed or: 10. Orlamunde, or, 
a lion rampt. sa., crowned gu. : 11. Eisenbero, arg., three bars az. : 
12. Pleissen, az., a lion rampt. or : 13. Altenberg, arg., a rose gu., 
seeded and barbed ppr. : 14. Ou., for right of Regalia : 15. Brehna, 
or Engern, arg., three boterols (Rcabbard-tags) gu. : 16. Ma rck, or, 
a fesse ehequee arg. and gu. : 17. A Nil ALT, gu., a column in pale arg., 
crowned or, the pedestal of the last : 18. Uen.nebergii, or, on a mound 



Digitized by Google 



314 THE ROYAL HERALDRY 

vert a cock aa., crested and traitled gu. : 19. Ravensbergh, arg., three 
chevronels gu. 

Impaled by William IV. 

38. His late Royal Highness, Albert, the Prince Consort, 
bore tho Arms of Saxony, quarterly, with the Royal Arms of 
England differenced with his own Label— a Label of three points 
arg., charged on the central point with a cross gu ; (See p. lb'7). It 
is customary in England to blazon the foliated bend of Saxony, 
as a bend treJUe vert y or as a bend arclike coronettee, or a coronet ex- 
tended in bend; this very beautiful Charge, however, which 
admits of rich and varied ornamentation, is a Chaplet or Wreath 




No. 353.— Shield of Arms of H.R.H. the late Prixce Consort. 



of Bue, and on the Continent it is blazoned a Crancelin, from the 
German Kranzlein, 'a small garland.' The ancient Arms of 
Saxony were barry of ten or and sa. : as an Augmentation to these 



Digitized by Google 



OF ENGLAND. 



315 



Arms, when he conferred the Dukedom of Saxony upon Bern- 
BABD, Count of Ascakia, the Emperor Barbarossa took off the 
Crown of Rue which he wore upon his head, and threw it ob- 
liquely across the shield of the newly-created Duke. (See Notes 
and Queries, 3rd Scries, No. 130, p. 522.) 

The Shield of His late Royal Highness, No. 353, is encircled 
with the Garter of the Order, and ensignedwith his own Coronet 
(No. 623) ; it is also supported by the Lion and Unicorn Supporters 
of England, both of them differenced with the same Label as the Arms, 
and the Lion crowned witfi the Prince's own Coronet ; the Crest is 
the Crest of England, but the Lion is differenced with the same Label 
and ensigned with the same Coronet ; the Achievement may be 
further augmented with the insignia of the various Ordeiu of 
which the Prince was a Knight. The Motto is, Treu und Fest, 
No. 353. 

SECTION VI. 

TIIK IMPERIAL CROWN. AND THE CORONETS OF THE PRINCES AND 
PRINCESSES OP THE PRESENT ROYAL FAMILY. 

'ITie Emblem and Ensign of Sovereignty, the Imperial Crown 
of Great Britain, has undergone several very decided changes in 
its form and enrichments, all of which come under the direct 
cognizance of the historical Herald. Many original authorities 
exist, which in this matter naturally illustrate and corroborate 
each other's contribution to heraldic History. Theso authorities 
are the Great Seals, the Coinage, Monumental Effigies, and mis- 
cellaneous Illuminations, Paintings, and Sculptures. 

The earliest form of the Crown worn by the English Kings 
after the Conquest, (which appears from various Illuminations 
closely to resemble the Crowns of the Anglo-Saxon Princes), is 
exemplified in the effigies of Henry II., and his Queen Alia- 
nore; of Richard I., and Isabella of Angouleme, at Fontovraud ; 
of Berengari a, at TEspan, near Mans, and of John, at Worcester. 
This Crown is a richly jewelled Circlet of gold, heightened with 



Digitized by Google 



316 THE ROYAL HERALDRY 

what may bo entitled heraldic Strawberry Leaves. These 
sculptured Crowns are all much mutilated, but still they plainly 
declare their original character. The Crowns of Richard and 
Berengaria have four large leaves only. Those of Henry, 
Alianore, and Isabella have four smaller leaves alternating 
with tho four larger ones. The Crown of John has also eight 
leaves, alternating largo and small, and in form they aro 
almost truo trefoils. Of this group of examples, tho most perfect 
are the Crowns of Richard I. and Berengaria, Nos. 548, 540, 
PL XLII. 

Tho Effigies of Henry HI. and Alianork of Castile have 
Crowns of trefoil-leaves of two sizes, a slightly raised point 
intervening between each pair of tho leaves. These Crowns 
doubtless were once enriched with real or imitative jewels and 
other adornments, which now leave no other traces of their 
former oxistenco than the small holes for attaching them to 
the Crowns themselves; No. 198, p. 61. 

The Coins of Edward I. show that his Crown was similar 
in character to those of his Consort and his Father. 

Tho Effigy of Edward EL, at Gloucester, still retains, almost 
uninjured, its sculptured enrichments. Tho Crown is formed 
of four largo, and four small Strawberry Leaves, rising with 
graceful curves from the jewelled Circlet, and having eight 
amall flowers alternating with the leaves ; No 550. 

The Crown appears to have remained tho same as that which 
I have last described, until the accession of tho first Lancastrian 
Sovereign, Henry IV. The elaborately sculptured Effigies of 
this Prince and of his Queen, Joanna, at Canterbury, wear 
magnificent Crowns, No. 551. Both have the same general 
character, the Crown of the Queen being distinguished by its 
smaller size and more delicate workmanship. In each, the 
jewelled Circlet is heightened by eight Strawberry Leaves, and 
as many Fleurs do lys, the whole alternating with sixteen nmall 
groups of pearls, three in each. Those sculptured images of 



Digitized by Google 



OF ENGLAND. 



317 



that " golden care," which was the one aim of Henry of Lan- 
caster, may bo supposod to bo faithful representations of the 
splendid " Harry Crown," broken up and employed as security 




No. 550.— Crown, Edwakd II. No. 551.— Crown, HenBY IV. 



for the loan required by Henry V., when about to embark on 
his expedition to France. Rymer records that the costly 
fragments were redeemed in the eight and ninth years of 
Henry VI. 

The next change in the Crown of England is one which com- 
pletely alters its general aspect. This now featuro consists in 
arching over the enriched Circlet with jewelled Bands of gold, 
and surmounting the enclosed Diadem with a Mound and Cross. 
The enrichments of the Circlet itself at tho same time are so 
far changed, that Crosses palees occupy the positions before 
filled by tho Strawberry Leaves, and Roses, or Fleurs dc lys ap- 
pear instead of the small clusters of Pearls. Tho arched Crown 
at first has tho arches elevated almost to a point ; after a 
while, the arches are somewhat depressed at their intersection ; 
then this depression is considerably incroasod ; and at length, 
in tho Crown of lira MAJEsrY, Queen VICTORIA, the arches, 
which bend over almost at right angles, are flattened abovo at 
tho intersection where the mound rests upon them. At first, 
also, the arches recede inwards from their spring from tho 
Circlet; then they slightly project beyond the Circlot; and now 
thoy rise almost vertically. Tho arches, in tho first instance, 
are numerous, but in the Great Seal of Richard III. thoro aro 



Digitized by Google 



318 



THE HOYAL HERALDRY 



four arches only. Their number in the Crown that ensigns 
the Hawthorn Bush Badge of Henry VII., is six, No. 545, 
PI. XLVII. ; but by Henry VIII. they are reduced to four. The 
Crown remained without any change during the Reigns of 
Edward VI., Mary, and Elizabeth ; oxcept that in the Great 
Seal of Elizabeth she appears wearing a small Diadem having 
eight arches. The Crown of the Stuart Sovereigns, James I. 
and Charles I., has eight arches. On the Great Seals of 
Charles II., James II., and Anne, tho Crown has four arches ; 
and that number has since remained unchanged. 

The arched Crown was introduced by Henry V., probably 
when a simpler emblem of Royalty was constructed on the 
breaking up of the more costly and precious Crown of his 
Father. It will be understood that until the close of the 
Reign of Edward IV., arched and unarched Crowns are both 
represented in sculpture, illuminations, and other works. The 
arched Crown, the arches having an ogee curvature, appears 
for the first time upon the Great Seal of Edward VI., and we 
learn from illuminations that a Crown similar to his own was 
worn by his Queen. 

The arches of the Crown always spring from behind the 
crosses patees that heighten tho circlet. The crosses on the 
Great Seal of Henry VIII. appear to be only four in number ; 
but the Tudor Crown generally is represented with eight crosses 
and as many fleurs de lys. Upon the monument of the Countess 
of Richmond, the mother of Henry VII., there are seven shields 
and one lozenge of arms ; of the former, three are ensigned 
with large crowns heightened with eight crosses, as many 
fleurs de lys, and sixteen small roses, and the crowns are arched 
with two depressed arches which support a mound and cross 
patee ; three more of these shields have similar crowns without 
the arches ; and one shield and the lozenge are without crowns, 
No. 557, Chap. XXIII. At the head and feet of the monument 
of Henry VII. there are crowns of four arches splendidly en- 



Digitized by Google 



C KOWX S. 



CHAPTER XIX 




Digitized by Google 



OF ENGLAND. 



319 



riched. The Crown of James [., represented on his Great 
Seal, retains eight crosses and eight flours do lys, without any 
roses ; and Charles II. reduces both crosses and fleurs de lys 
to four, the same number as the arches. The velvet cap, worn 
within the Crown, appears for the first time upon the Great 
Seal of Henry VIII. 

The successive changes in the Crown of England aro ex- 
emplified in No. 552, PL XLIL, Henry V., from Westminster 
Abbey; No. 553, Henry VI.; No. 554, Edward IV., and No. 
555, from the Great Seal of the same king; No. 556, Chap. 

XXII. , Henry VII., from King's College Chapel, Cambridgo; 
it will be observed that the Koyal Motto in this splendid Crown 
is charged upon the circlet of the diadem; No. 557, Chap. 

XXIII. , Crown from the monument of Margaret, Countess of 
Richmond, in Westminster ; No. 558, PL XLIL, Henry VIII. ; 
at Norwich on a building, a shield of Henry VIII. is ensigncd 
with a Crown of the simple form shown in No. 558 a ; Nos. 
559, and 560, PI. XLIL, Charles I., and Charles II., both from 
their Great Soals. Thus the Crown is brought to assume the 
character shown in No. 562, which has four crosses patees, and 




No. 562.— The Initial Crown. 



four fleurs de lys, set alternately on the circlet, and four pearl- 
studded arches which rise from within the crosses, and carry at 
their intersection the Mound and Cross. The arches in this 



Digitized by Google 



320 



THE ROYAL HERALDRY 



example aro depressed, and their sweep projects somewhat be- 
yond the circlet. 

Tho Crown of Her Majesty's immediate predecessors, No. 562, 
lias already become historical, having been superseded by the 
new State Crown, No. 624, made for tho Coronation of the Queen, 
aud in use on those occasions of high state ceremonial which 
require the presence of this emblem of Royal Dignity. This 
Crown differs from No. 562 rather in enrichment than in its 




No. G24.— The State Crown of IIer Majesty the Queen. 

arrangement. There is, indeed, a decided difference in the 
contour of the arches, which rise almost perpendicularly from 
within the crosses patees, and are somewhat elevated (instead of 
being depressed) at their intersection. Tho Crown is completely 
covered with diamonds, and is also richly studded with various 
other costly gems. The arches assume tho form of wreaths of 
the rose, thistle, and shamrock formed of brilliants. The cap is 
of purple velvet, lined with ermine. 

The Heraldic Crown which enjoys the Royal favour, differs 
from both No. 562, and tho State Crown, No. 624, and inclines 
to the type of an earlier time ; this Heraldic Crown of our Most 



Digitized by GoogI 



OF ENGLAND. 



321 



Gracious Sovereign is represented in No. 334, page 332, ensigning 
tho Royal Shield of Arms. 

The Coronet of U.K. II., Albert, tho late Prince Consort, 
differs from tho Imperial Crown in having eight instead of four 
arches ; these arches rise from strawberry leaves and are curved. 
The details of tho enrichments are also peculiar: No. 562 a. 




No. 502 a. —Coronet of the late Prince Consort. 

The Coronet of H.R.H., Albert Edward, Prince of Wales, has 
two arches only, which rise from a jewelled circlet, heightened 
as tho Imperial Crown. Tho arches arc surmounted by a mound 
and cross. The cap is of crimson velvet : No. 503. 




No. 563.— Coronet of H.R.H., the Prince or Wales. 

The Prince of Wales also bears, as the ensign of that Prin- 
cipality, a jowelled circlet heightened with four crosses patecs 
and as many flours do lys, which encloses a plume of throe ostrich 
feathers rising above the circlet itself. Below, on a ribbon, tho 
motto, 41 Ich Dim" No. 235 a, PI. XV. See also pages 256 and 
328, and Chap. XXIV., Sect 1. 

Y 

Digitized by Google 



322 



THE ROYAL HERALDRY 



The Coronets of the other Princes, tho Sons of the Queen, and 
of the Princesses, tho Daughters of Her Majesty, have the circlet 
heightened with four crosses patees, and four fleurs de lys. The 
cap, of crimson velvet, is lined with ermine, and is surmounted 
by a golden tassel ; No. 564, PL XLI. 

The Coronels of the Princes and Princesses, the Grandsons and 
Granddaughters of the Queen, differ from those of their Royal 
Uncles and Aunts, only in having the circlet heightened with 
two crosses patees, as many strawberry leaves, and four fleurs do 
lys; No. 565. 

Tho Coronets of tho Royal Cousins of the Queen have tho 
circlet heightened with crosses pathos and strawborry leaves only ; 
No. 566, PL XLI. 

SECTION VII. 

ARMS OF THEIR ROYAL HIGHNESSES, TUB PRINCE AND PRINCESS OF WALES, 
AND OF THE OTHER MEMBERS OF THE ROYAL FAMILY. 

I. Arms of T.R.H., The Prince and Princess of Wales. 

1. H.R.H., Albert Edward, K.G., K.S.I., The Prince of Wales, 
is also Duke of Cornwall and of Rothsay, Earl of Chester, of 
Dublin, and of Carrick, Baron Renfrew and Lord of the Isi.es ; 
also, in right of his lamented Father, tho Prince is Duke of 
Saxony. The Armorial Insignia of His Royal Highness, ac- 
cordingly, assume a threefold division, and they are blazoned 
with an aggroupment which exemplifies three distinct yet united 
orders of Marshalling. The happy alliance formed by tho 
Prince of Wales with tho Princess Alexandra of Denmark, 
now Princess of Wales, adds a fourth to thoso three orders of 
Marshalling. 

Tho Arms usually borne by the Phince of Wales are thus 
blazoned The Royal Arms of England, differenced with the Label 
of the Heir Apparent — a Label of three points arg. ; over all, Saxony : 
Supporters, — The Lion and Unicorn of England, differenced with tfte 



Digitized by Google 



OF ENGLAND, 



323 



Label and cnsigned with the Coronet of the Prince ; Crest,— The Crest 
of England, but the Lion differenced and crowned as the dexter Sup- 
porter : in association with the Crest, above the Arms, is placed 
the Feather Badge of the Prince ; Motto, — Ich Dien : tho shield is 
encircled with the Garter of the Order, and cnsigned with the 
Prince's own Coronet. 

The early usage of Heraldry would require that the dexter 
Supporter and the Crest should bo ensigned with the Imperial Crown, 
while differenced with the Label of the Heir Apparent. It also ap- 
pears to be at varianco with both the spirit and the practical 
usage of the true Historical Heraldry of England, that the Arms 
of Saxony, the paternal and hereditary Insignia of his Royal 
Father, should be marshalled upon an escutcheon of pretence 
with the shield of the Prince of Wales, when that Shield does 
not display tho Ensigns of the Prince's Dignities of the second 
order. The Arms of tho Prince of Wales as Heir Apparent have 
a distinct individuality of their own, with which nothing, except 
the Arms of the Royal Consort of the Prince, ought to be directly 
associated. It would, however, be both strictly correct and 
much to be desired that the Princo should bear a Second Shield, 
charged in the first grand quarter with his own quartered Arms 
duly differenced as Heir Apparent, and having in the other 
grand quarters the Arms of all the other Dignities enjoyed by 
His Royal Highness marshalled in becoming order. Or, what on 
the whole would seem to bo still more desirable, the Prince 
might bear upon a single shield, (with a quartered inescutcheon 
itself charged with a Shield of pretence,) all his armorial in- 
signia duly marshalled in conformity with their historical sig- 
nificance. 

Tho Arms of the Second Order borne by the Prince of Wales 
are these : — 

1. Cornwall :—sa., ten bezants, four, three, tm&gt;, and one. 

2. Roths AY : — Scotland, differenced with a label of three points arg. 

3. Chester : — az., three garbs or. 

y 2 



Digitized by Google 



324 TIIE ROYAL HERALDRY 

4. Dublin : — Ireland, differenced with a label of three points org. 

5. Lord of thk Isles : — arg., on waves of the sea ppr, a lymphad 

m. 

6. For the feudal Earldom of Carrick, and Barony of Renfrew, 
ancient dignities of the Heir Apparent to the Scottish Crown,— 
or, a chevron gu. 

7. To this group I add the Arms of the Principality of Wales, 
— quarterly, 1 and 4, gu. y a lion pass, guard, or ; 2 and 3, or, a lion 
pass, guard, gu., No, 697, PI. LX. 

The Arms of the Prince's Dukedom of Saxe Coburo Gotha con- 
stitute a distinct Order in themselves : see p. 314. 

In No. 720, PI. LIII., I have marshalled the Arms of the 
Prince, the throe Orders of the Arms being displayed upon a 
single Shield, with an Inescutcheon bearing a Shield of Pretence. 
This shield — that is, the primary shield in this composition— bears 
the Arms of the Prince as Heir Apparent : those are the Royal Arms 
of the reigning Sovereign differenced with a silver label, — as the 
Royal Arms for the time being, thus differenced, have been always 
borne by the Heirs Apparent of England, the Princes of Wales, 
since the time of the Black Prince. Upon the Secondary Shield — 
the Inescutcheon in No. 720— are marshalled all the armorial 
Insignia of the second order borne by the Prince of Wales, 
including the Arms of the Principality, to which in deference to 
their rank I have yielded the first quarter: thus this Ines- 
cutcheon bears, 1. Wales; 2. Cornwall; 3. Rothsay ; 4. Chester; 
5. Carrick; 6. The Isles; 7. Dublin. The third Shield, marshalled 
in pretence over all, is charged with Saxony, the foreign Duke- 
dom of the Prince of Wales. 

It is a very singular circumstance that the Arms of the Prin- 
cipality of Wales should heretofore have been omitted, as if by universal 
consent, from the Quartered Shield of the Prince of Wales. The 
ancient Arms of Wales are not marshalled upon the Royal 
Shield with England, Scotland, and Ireland ; but, I presume, 
Wales is held to be included within the realm of England, and 



Digitized by Google 




ARMS OK H. H. H TMK PHI. NT K OK WALKS K.i. 
Dl'KK OF SAXO.VY OK COHNWAl.l. * OK KOTHSAY 
KAIth OK CHESTER, OF C AI'HICK , A. OK IM HUN 
BAHOX HKNFHKW. LORD OK THE ISLE &lt;L« X. &amp;&lt; 



Digitized by Google 



Digitized by Google 



Digitized by Google 



AKMS OF THE n*V DIGNITIES OF THE PRINCE OF A\iU.ES. 
AXP OF THE PKIXTUULITY OF WALES: 




Kiate ia 



Digitized by Google 



OF ENGLAND. 



325 



therefore it is considered to be represented hcraldically by the 
Lions of England. Accordingly, when be differences the Royal 
Shield with his own silver label, the Prince of Wales would 
bear the Arms of Wales as Prince — precisely as his Royal Mo- 
ther bears the Arms of Wales expressed with those of England, 
as the Sovereign, in Her own Royal Aims. At the same time, 
it appears altogether to be desired that the distinct Amu of the 
Principality of Wales should be marshalled in the first quarter of 
the Quartered Arms of the Prince of Wales. Upon the base- 
ment of the monument of Queen Elizabeth, as I have shown, 
(Chap. XXIII.) are four Shields of Arms ; one of this group is 
Wales; the three other Shiolds of the group are Ireland, Corn- 
wall, and Chester : thus the Arms of the Principality have a 
recognized place with tho soparate Shields of Cornwall and 
Chester and also of Ireland. The Arms which I have just 
blazoned for the Principality of Wales, No. 697, PI. LX., are taken 
from an Achievement of Queen Elizabeth which is engraved 
in 44 Regal Heraldry:" I am bound, however, to add that Owen 
Glendwyr, as Prince of Wales, a.d. 1404, blazons the Lions on 
his Secretum as rampant. No. 698, PI. LX., (see also Archceologia, 
xxv., 619, and xxix., 407.) As Princes of Wales also, Edw. Plan- 
tagenet, son of Edward IV., and Arthur Tudor, son of Henry VII., 
bore separately for tho Principality, arg., three lions coward in pale 
gu., No. 699, PI. LX. : this coat is said sometimes to have been 
assigned specifically to North Wales, whilo the Arras of South 
Wales would be No. 698. 

2. H.R.H., Alexandra, Princess of Wales, as Daughter of tho 
Kino of Denmark, bears Ute Royal Arms of Denmark without any 
Difference. 

Tho Arms of Denmark proper are, or, semee of human hearts gu., 
three lions pass, guard, in pale az., crowned gold : but tho Shield of 
tho Princess, after the manner of Continental Heraldry, is ono 
of many Quartcrings ; and it is very remarkable that this Shield, 
when blazoned witli all its various Bearings, in its Marshal ling 



Digitized by Google 



320 



THE ROYAL HERALDRY 



exhibits precisely the same order of arrangement as distinguishes 
the Shield, No. 720, PI. LIU., of the Prince of Wales himself. 

The Quartered Shield of the Princess of Wales will be readily 
understood by the aid of the annexed diagram, No. 687. Several 
of these quart erings have been blazoned in Section 5 of this 
Chapter. 




No. 687. 



Diagram, No. 687 : — a, a, a, a, the white Cross of Denmark upon 
red: I.Denmark : 2. Schleswig: 3. Sweden Modern: 4. Iceland, 
gu. y a stockfish org., crowned or, (See Heraldry of Fish, p. 174): 
5. Faroe Islands, az., a cock passant org. : 6. Greenland, az., 
a polar bear rampt. org. : 7. Jutland: 8. Ensign of the Vandals. 
On the secondary Shield, or Inescutcheon, — 9. Holstein : 10. Stor- 
merk: 11. Dietmarschen (Ditzmers) : 12. Lanenburg, gu., a 
horse's head couped org. On the third Shield, in pretence over all, 
— 13. Oldenburg: 14. Delmenhurst. These Arms are blazoned 
in Plate LXXV., No. 710. The two shields in this Plate show, 
(No. 709) the quartered shield of Denmark from a Garter-Plate 
of the year 1581, and (No. 710) the quartered shield of the Den- 
mark of to-day ; thus the changes which have taken place in the 
course of nearly three centuries are evident at a glance. These 



Digitized by Google 



ROYAL ARMS OF DENMARK 

CHAPTER XIX c£CTTJN«J d Mi &amp; CHAPTER XXX a 



AKM8 ,\0»V BORSK BY THK PHIXCKSS OF WALKS 




&gt; " 

\f 






. 4y// 



BY FREDERICK II. K.G.KING OK DENMARK. 




From fli* G«et*j &gt;...'•- j* V.'m.lso" 



Rate I.XXV 



Digitized by Google 



1 



Digitized by Google 



Digitized by Google 



IMPAliKD LOZKXGE &amp; SHIELDS OF ARMS. 




Digitized by Google 



OF ENGLAND. 



327 



two shields may also bo compared with the blazon of tho Arms 
of Prince George of DENMARK in page 811. It would seem that 
still further changes in the shield that is so closely allied with 
his own, may now be expected by our Prince of Wales. A 
contury before the Garter-Plato of Frederick II. was fixed at 
Windsor, the Arms of Denmark appear under different conditions 
of aggroupment impaled with Scotland upon tho Lozenge of Anns 
of Margaret, daughter of Chkistiern I., the Queen of James III. 
of Scotland, who was killed a.d. 1488; No. 719, PI. LU. This 
Lozenge, which is blazoned in a highly interesting contemporary 
painting now in the Palace of Holyrood, containing tho por- 
traitures of King James and Queen Margaret with various other 
personages, bears Scotland, the tressuro not dimidiated, impaling 
Denmark marshalled as follows — the field divided into four 
quarters by tho Cross of Danncbrog ; in tho first quarter, Scandi- 
navia or Sweden ; in the second, Denmark proper ; in the third, 
Noncay Ancient ; tho Sclavonic Dragon of the Vandals being in 
the fourth quarter. The Escutcheon of pretence bears, 1 and 4, 
on a field gules a device which appears to have been mistaken by 
the painter for the arms of Holstein ; and 2 and 3, Schle*icig ; over 
all, on a second Inescutcheon, Oldenbitrgh alone. 

3. No. 568 represents tho Arms of Denmark proper impaled by 
the Arms of tho Prince of Wales without his secondary Ines- 
cutcheon, but charged in pretence with Saxony : this impaled 
shield, ensigned with the Coronet, Badge, and Crest of tho 
Prince, and at its base having his Motto, may be accepted as 
the popular form of representing the united Arms of their Koyal 
Highnesses. 

The early and long sustained usage of impaling the Arms of a 
married Prince and Princess has been set aside by high authority 
in marshalling tho Arms of tho present Prince and PRINCESS of 
Wales. The authorized arrangement is such as this: — Tho 
Shield of the Prince, as it is blazonod at the commencement of 
this Section, encircled with the Gartor of the Order, to tho 



Digitized by Google 



328 



THE ROYAL HERALDRY 



Dexter of the composition ; to the Sinister the quartered Shield of 
the Princess encircled by a Garland ; these two Shields supported 
by the Supporters of the Prince, ensigned by his Coronet, his 
Crest, and his Badge, and with his Motto in base. The Impaled 
Shield, No. 568, marshalled in exact accordance with early prin- 
ciples and early practical usago also, appeal's in every respect to 
be preferable to tho present system of two distinct Shields. 




No. 5tts. 

Tho Garter-Plate of Prince William, tho son of Queen Anne and 
Prince George of Denmark, marshals in pretenco a Shield of 
Denmark proper only, without any quarterings : and, accordingly, 
this Garter-Plate, as far as it may be accepted as an authority, 
sanctions the presonce of tho Shield of Denmark as I have mar- 
shalled it, without tho other quarterings borno on his Royal 
Shield by the King of Denmark himself ; it must bo admitted, at 



Digitized by Google 



OF ENGLAND. 



320 



the same time, that this Garter-Plate in like manner affords a 
precedent for charging Saxony in pretence upon the Arms of the 
Prince, as in No. 568. 

4. To the great interest naturally felt in tho armorial insignia 
of the Prince and Princess of Wales, I am indebted for many 
valuable and gratifying communications having reference to tho 
Arms of their Koyal Highnesses ; but I am not ablo to adduce 
any example of a Shield of the Prince of Wales, marshalled by 




No. 718.— Design for Marshalling the Arms of the Piunce of Wales, K.G. 



autJtority with all its quarterings. My own quartered Shields, I 
need scarcely add, are merely suggestions— suggestions, however, 
based upon early precedent, and aspiring to be faithful expres- 
sions of Historical Heraldry. In order more fully to exemplify 
to Students of Heraldry tho nuggestive as well as the directly 
historical character of the Armorial Ensigns of the Prince of 
Wales, I now add one or two other compositions as heraldic 
studies. No. 718 marshals the Arms of the Prince of Wales 



Digitized by Google 



330 



THE ROYAL HERALDRY 



differenced with his own Label quarterly with Saxony. That is, 
it represents the Prince as the Eldest Son and Heir of the Queen 
and of the late Prince Consort. In this Shield, Saxony appears 
alono in the 2nd and 3rd quarters, because the differenced 
Arms borne by the late Prince Consort in the 1st and 4th 
quarters of his own Shield may claim to have been in a peculiar 
sense personal to himself alone. The Escutcheon of Pretence 
in No. 718 quarters Cornwall, Chester, Bothsay, and Dublin (the 
label improperly omitted) only, and it bears the feudal Shield 
of the Ibles in pretence. Again, in No. 096, PI. LX., the Shield, 
which is quarterly of fivo, bears Comically Bothsay, the two Duke- 
doms, in chief ; Chester, the Isles, and Dublin, the three Coats in 
base, being marshalled in their order of heraldic seniority; 
Carrich, as the Shield of a feudal Earldom, is in pretence. In 
this composition, which is merely a study for marshalling the 
British and Irish Arms of the Prince of Wales, Saxony is not 
introduced. 

In Plate LIIL, the Shield which corresponds with the No. 696 
of Plate LX. appears in its proper position, in pretence upon tho 
Boyal Shield duly differenced with the silver Label of the Prince 
of Wales. The Shield of Pretence in No. 720, PI. LIIL, differs 
from No. 696, only in theso three respects : it bears Wales in the 
first quarter; it marshals Carrich in tho fifth quarter; and it 
displays Saxony over all upon a second Inescutcheon. 

The Arms of Carrich I have given upon official authority, as 
being, gu., a chevron or. Tho Bruces, Earls of Carrick, before 
their family attained to the Royal Dignity, bore, arg. y a saltire and 
a chief az., (Roll Henry III.); and Mr. Seton (pp. 191, 195), 
with a reference to Laing's Catalogue (Nos. 164 and 783), gives 
the Seals of Duncan, Earl of Carrick, a.d. 1180, charged with 
a dragon ; and that of John, Earl of Carrick, a.d. 1380, after- 
wards Robert III., bearing Scotland with a Label. I observe that 
Mr. Seton, at tho end of his Preface has a Shield of Scotland 
thus differenced with a silver Label of three points, impaling Den- 



Digitized by Google 



Digitized by Google 



CORONETS AND CHESTS. 




OF ENGLAND. 



331 



mark proper alone, the whole being charged upon the Plume of 
tho Prince of Wales. A Scottish Herald might also marshal for 
the Prince a Shield quarterly of Rothsay, Carrick, and the Isles. 

II. Their Royal Highnesses, the Princes Alfred, Arthur, and 
Leopold : — the Royal Arms differenced with their own Labels, 
Nos. 569, 570, 571, PL XXXVI.; the Crest and Supporters being 
differenced in like manner, and the Shield ensigned with the Coronet ; 
No. 564, PI. LXI. 

Their Royal Highnesses, the Princess Royal, and the Prin- 
cesses Alice:, Helena, Louisa, and Beatrice: — the Royal Arms 
differenced with their own Labels, and impaled by Prussia and Hesse 
for the Princess Royal and the Princess Alice ; No. 572 and 573, 
PI. XXXVI. ; see also Chapter XXXII. The Royal Arms upon 
Lozenges, differenced with their own Labels, Nos. 574, 575, and 570, 
and the Supporters differenced with the same Labels, by the younger 
Princesses. Their Royal Highnesses all ensign their Arms with 
their own Coronet, No. 564, but they do not bear any Crest. 

H.R.H., the Duke of Cambridge, K.G., differences the Royal 
Arms, Supporters, and Crest, with his own Label, No. 577, 
PI. XXXVI. ; and he ensigns his Shield with his own Coronet, 
No. 566, PI. XLI. Tho Princess Mary of Cambridge chargos 
tho same Label upon her Lozenge of Arms. 

SECTION VIH. 

The Royal Achievement of Arms of Her Majesty the Queen 
is composed of 

The Royal Shield, bearing England, Scotland, and Ireland, 
quarterly ; the Shield being encircled with the Garter, charged 
with the Motto of tho Order : 

The Supporters, the Lion and Unicorn : 

The Helm, with its Mantling, ensigned with tho Crown, and 
thereon the Crest of England, a Lion statant guardant or, im- 
perially crowned : 

Tho Motto being the words, Dieu et mon Droit, upon a ribbon 
benoath the shield, from which issue 



Digitized by Google 



333 



THE ROYAL HERALDRY OF ENGLAND. 



The Badges, the Rose, HiisUe, and Shamrock, all of them en- 
grafted on the same stem. 

It would be strictly correct to add other Badges, for England, 
a red and a white Rose ; for Scotland, a Thistle ppr. ; for Ireland, 
a Shamrock-leaf vert, and a Harp or, stringed arg. ; for Wales, a 
Dragon , wings addorscd, gu., passant on a mount vert. 

All these Badges to be ensigned with the Imperial Crown. 

Also, the Crest for Scotland, on an Imperial Crown, a Lion, 
sejant affronte gu., imperially crowned, holding in the dexter paw a 
stcord, and in the sinister paw a sceptre, both erect and ppr. ; No. 567, 
Hate XL VI. : and 

Tho Crest for Ireland, on a wreath or and az., a Castle triple- 
towered of the first, a Hart arg., attired or, springing from the gate. 

The Badges of the several Orders of Knighthood might also be 
introduced into this composition. 




Digitized by Google 



No. 28G. — Shield of Edward III., from his Monument in Westminster 
Abbey, tho Garter being added. See pp. 107 and 295.) 



CHAPTER XX. 

ORDERS OF KNIGHTHOOD, AND INSIGNIA AND AUGMENTATIONS OF 

HONOUR. 

Early in the middle ages, the Insignia of knightly rank, worn 
alike by every member of the chivalry of those days, were the 
Knight's own Sword and Lance — the latter with ite Pennon, — his 
Shield of Arms, and his golden Spurs. Then the Crusades led 
to the formation of the Orders of priestly soldiers, so well known 
as the Hospitallers, or Knights of St. John of Jerusalem, and 
the Knights Templars. Theso Orders possessed distinctive In- 
signia peculiar to themselves. 

1. The nospiTALLicRS, instituted about a.d. 1092, and intro 
duced into England about the year 1100, wore over their 
armour a black habit, charged with a silver cross of eight points, 
No. 578, PL XXXV.; but between the years 1278 and 1289. 



Digitized by Google 



331 



ORDERS OF KNIGHTHOOD. 



when engaged in military duties, they assumed a red surcoai 
bearing a silver cross straight. 

2. The Templars, instituted a.d. 1118, were introdnced into 
England during tho reign of Stephen, about the year 1140. 
Their habit was white, with a red cross of eight points, the form 
of this oross being identical with the white cross of tho Hos- 
pitallers, No. 578, PI. XXXV. The Cross of the Templars was 
worn on the left shoulder. Their war-cry was " Beau Scant /" 
Their Banner, which bore the same name, was per /esse sa. and 
arg. It is represented in the Temple Church, London, as in 
No. 579. Thoy also displayed above their formidable lanco a 
second Banner of their own colours, white, charged with the Cross 
of the Order, No. 580. As Badges, the Templars bore the 
Agnus Dei ; and a device representing two knights mounted on 
a single horse, to denote the original poverty of the Order. The 
present Arms of tho Barrister Templars of the Inner Temple, 
which are derived from the Badge last named, are, az., a pegasus 
salient, winged arg., (some say or), the two horsemen of tho 
early device having in later times been mistaken for wings. 
In tho year 1309 the Knights Templars were suppressed, and, 
by a papal bull dated April 3, 1312, their Order was abolished. 
It is remarkable that amongst the numerous knightly effigies 
that are in existence, and of which many fine examples belong 
to the Templar era, not a single individual commemorates any 
brother of tho chivalry, of the Temple. It is highly probablo 
that some now forgotten rule prohibited monumental commemo- 
ration amongst those priest-soldiers, or else their ill repute 
lod to the complete destruction of every personal memorial of 
them. The idea that crossed-legged military effigies represont 
and commemorate Templars, though still retained by many per- 
sons who prefer fanciful theories to more sober facts, has long 
been proved to be without any foundation. 



Digitized by Google 



ORDERS OF KNIGHTHOOD. 



335 



3. Tho peculiar form of Cross, entitled, from its resemblance 
to the Greek T, tho Tau Crow, No. 57, PI. III., appears worn as 
a knightly ensign npon a small number of monumental effigies. 
This is tho symbol of an Order established on the Continent, 
and styled the Order of Sr. Anthony. At Ingham, in Nor- 
folk, the oorioua effigies (now sadly mutilated) of Sir Roger de 
Bois and his Lady, wear mantles charged with tho Tau Cross 
within a circle, and having the word anthon in chief, No. 481, 
PI. XXXIX. ; the date is about 1360. In the sixteenth century, 
this samo cross is occasionally found attached to a chain that is 
worn about the neck, as in the brass to Henry Stanley, a.d. 
1528, at Hillingdon, Middlesex. The Tau Cross is borne by 
the family of Drury between two mullets on a chief. 

4. Collars, composed of various heraldic devices, and worn 
about the neck, were in use in the time of Richard II. These 
Collars, however, were not regarded as insignia of any Order of 
Knighthood, as that expression is now understood bj' ourselves, 
and as the Order of the Garter was understood at that period. 
They were decorations of honour, and they also very generally 
denoted political partizanship. Tho rival Houses of Lancaster 
and York had their Collars, of which many characteristic 
examples yet remain. Private Collars were also worn, as a 
species of Badge, at the same period ; they were charged with 
the personal devices of the wearers. Thus, in his Brass at 
Wootton-under-Edge, Gloucestershire, a.d. 1392, Thomas, fourth 
Baron Berkeley, wears, over his camail, a collar composed of 
Mermaids — a Badge of his House, which may possibly have been 
derived from tho M Mermaids of tho Sea " of tho Black Prince, 
and so may indicate attachment to thai illustrious personage; 
No. 225 a, p. G8. 

5. The Lancastrian Collar of SS is composed of a series 
of tho lcttor S in gold, the letters being either linked together, 



Digitized by Google 



386 



ORDERS OF KNIGHTHOOD. 



or set in close order upon a blue and white ribbon. The ends 
are always connected by two buckles and a trefoil-shaped link, 
from which a jewel depends. This Collar was worn by persons 
of both sexos, and of various ranks. It appears, amongst many 
others, in the sculptured effigies of Queen Joanna, at Canter- 
bury; of Ralph Neville, Earl of Westmorland, and his two 
Countesses, at Staindrop, Durham ; of Thomas and John Fitz- 
Alan, Earls of Arundel, at Arundol ; of Robert, Lord Hunger- 
ford, at Salisbury Cathedral ; of Robert de Marmion, at Tanfield, 
Yorkshire ; of Sir Humphrey Stafford, at Bromsgrove, Worces- 
tershire ; of Sir Edmund and Lady De Thorpe, at Ashwell- 
Thorpc, Norfolk; and of Sir William Phillip, K.G., styled 
Lord Barijolf, and his Lady, at Hovoringham, Notts ; also in 
the Brasses to Lord Camoys, K.G., at Trotton, Sussex ; to Sir 
Thomas and Lady Massyngeberde, at Gunby, Lincolnshire ; and 
Sir William and Lady Bagot, at Baginton, Warwickshire. An 
early example of this Collar occurs in the Brass to Sir Thomas 
Burton, at Little Casterton, Rutland : it is certain, however, 
that this Brass is several years later than the date usually given 
to it — a.d. 1382, the fifth of Richard II. Another early example, 
in the sculptured effigy of John Gower, the poet, at St. Saviour's 
Church, Southwark, has the De Bohun Swan, the favourite 
Badge of Henry of Bolingbroke, attached as a pendant to tho 
Collar ; No. 585 a, PI. XLIII. The SS Collar of Queen Joanna, 
No. 583, has boon slightly injured, but it still very clearly shows 
the character of this decoration. The Collars of Lord Hunger- 
ford, a.d. 1455, No. 582, and of Sir Robert de Marmion, about 
a.d. 1400, No. 584, both of which have received some injuries, 
and that of Sir William Phillip, (whose effigy is also deco- 
rated with tho Garter of the Order), which is very perfect and of 
elaborate richnoss, No. 585, PI. XLIII., are all eminently charac- 
teristic examples. The SS Collar was assumed by Henry IV., 
probably many years before his accession, and by him it cer- 
tainly was distinguished as a Lancastrian ensign. 



Digitized by Google 



LANCASTRIAN COI/LARS OF SS 
INSIGNIA OF THE GS.RTER. 




Digitized by Google 



Digitized by Google 



ORDERS OK KNIGHTHOOD. 



337 



In the centre of the Canopy above his monument at Canter- 
bury, the Shield of Henry IV. is encircled with a Collar of SS, 
after the manner of the Garter of the Order. This shield 
bears France Modern and England, impaling Navarre and Eureux, 
No. 348, PL XXIII. ; upon the Collar the S is repeated twenty- 
threo times, and the customary trefoil clasp is charged with a 
small Eagle displayed, apparently a subsequent addition. The 
letters SS are richly ornamented and linked together. Two 
other larger Shields, one of France and England, and the other of 
Navarre, are also encircled with similar Collars of SS ; and the 
field of tho Canopy is semie of the same Collars, small and on 
ribbons, on a ground azure powdered with golden cinquefoils. 
Eagles, Greyhounds and Gennets, with the Mottoes Soverayne and 
Atemperance, also take a prominent part in the horaldic decora- 
tion of this remarkable Canopy. The monument of Catherine 
Swynforde, the third wife of John of Ghent, mother of the Bead- 
forts, was originally adorned with shields of arms encircled by 
Collars of S. When I last examined the original in Lincoln 
Cathedral, the panels of tho monument, which are deeply scorod 
with the matrices of the lost Brasses, were standing reversed, so 
that the pendants of the Collars of S were in chief. In the 
church of St. Mary, at Bury St. Edmunds, tho ceiling of the 
eastern compartment of the south aisle, once tho Chantry of 
John Baret, is richly painted and diapered with beautifully- 
drawn Collars of SS, each Collar enclosing tho Monogram of this 
zealous Lancastrian, LB. 

The origin of the device itself still remains uncertain. It is 
generally supposed to have been intended to represent Henry's 
favourite motto, Soveraygne, by repeating the initial letter of 
the word. Mr. John Gough Nichols, however, has suggested 
the word Seneschal, (John of Ghent was Seneschal, or High 
Steward of England), to be substituted for Soveraygne; and 
Mr. Planch£ hints that the Sican Badge may havo had something 
to do with the SS of the Collar. Possibly, after all, the repel i- 

z 



Digitized by Google 



838 



ORDERS OF KNIGHTHOOD. 



tion of tho letter 8 may denote rather the initials of several 
words, than tho initial of any single word, though I myself 
incline to the opinion that the S is the initial of Soveraygne. 

Henry VII., under whom the SS Collar had by no means alto- 
gether lost its Lancastrian character, introduced his Tudor 
Badge, tho Portcullis, alternating with each S ; and he further 
added either a Tudor Rose or a Portcullis, as a Fendant to the 
Collar thus modified. A good example occurs in tho effigy 
of Sir John Cheyney, K.G., a.d. 1489, in Salisbury Cathedral. 
At Coleshill, in the very perfect alabaster effigy of a knight, 
a.d. 1519, tho Collar of SS has a George dopending from it. 
Other late examples of this Collar occur at Elford in Stafford- 
shire ; tho latest there appears upon the effigy of Sir William 
Smythe, a.d. 1526; the pendant is a cross pateo. A still later 
oxample, a.d. 1548, at Sefton, in Lancashire, is tho Collar repre- 
sented on the Brass to Sir William Molineux, who at Flodden 
" duo armorum vexiUa Scotis strenue resistentibus sua manu ccepit." 
By Henry VIII. the wearing tho Collar SS was restricted to tho 
degree of a Knight. This Collar with certain modifications, is 
still worn by the Heralds, by tho Lord Mayor of London, and 
by the Lords Chief Justices, and some others of the Judgos. 

6. The Yorkist Collar of Suns and Roses, significantly 
characteristic of the rival House of tho Plantagenets, has not 
left so many examples as thero exist of the Collar of SS. In 
the chancel of Aston Church, near Birmingham, are two 
Effigies, both finely sculptured in alabaster, and resting within 
a yard or two of each other upon raised tombs. Tho figuros 
are those of knights, and their armour is such as two brothers 
might have worn when Edward IV. fought his way to tho 
throne. In life, these knights were certainly contemporaries; 
probably they wore near neighbours, and possibly near kinsmen 
also : but that they were mortal enemies is clearly indicated 
by the circumstance that one wears the Collar of SS, while tho 



Digitized by Google 



Digitized by Google 



YORKIST COLLARS OF SUNS fc ROSES 
fc INSIGNIA OF THE GARTER 




Digitized by Google 



ORDERS OF KNIOHTHOOD. 



339 



Collar of tho other is charged with tho Suns and Roses of York. 
Long havo those 

" Knights been dust, 
And their good swords rust :" 

their effigies, however, silently though they roposo beneath 
the same consecrated roof that has sheltered them both for four 
centuries, have a talo of English History which they tell 
eloquently enough to every observant student of historical 
Heraldry. 

The Yorkist Collar is formed of suns and rose*, which aro 
set, like tho SS 1 otters, upon a ribbon, or sometimes they are 
either linked together with chains, or placed in immediate con- 
tact Tho white lion Badge is generally attached to the Collar, 
and forms a pendint from it The Collar of the Yorkist Knight 
at Aston is represented in No. 586, PI. XLIV. From amongst 
other examples in sculptured effigies I select for particular notice 
the Collars of Sir Robert Harcourt, K.G., a.d. 1471, at Stanton 
Harcourt, Oxfordshire, No. 291 ; of one of tho NEVILLES and his 
Lady — probably Ralph Neville, second Earl of Westmorland, 
who died in 1484, and one of his two Countesses, at Branspeth, 
Durham, No. 587 ; of tho Countess of William Fitz-Alan, Earl 
of Arundel, a.d. 1487, at Arundel, No. 588, PI. XLIV. ; and of 
Sir John and Lady Crosby, a.p. 1475, at Groat St Helen's 
Church, London. In the Collar of the Countess of Arundel, tho 
Suns and Roses are linked together with clusters of oak-leaves — a 
Badge of tho Fitz- Alans. Ralph Neville has his Collar formed 
of Bases en Soleil, with a white boar, tho Badge of Richard III., 
as the pendant ; and his Countess has both tho suns and roses, 
with a pendent jewel. Tho Yorkist Collar is also introduced 
into the Brasses to Henry Bourchier, K.G., Earl of Essex, and his 
Countess, a.d. 1483, at Littlo Easton, Essex, No. 580, PI. XLIV. ; 
to Sir Anthony Grey, at St. Albans ; and to Roger Dfx Bothe, 
Esquire, a.d. 1407, at Sawley, in Derbyshire. 

■i 2 

Digitized by Google 



340 



OR HERS OF KNIGHTHOOD. 



7. Thb Most Noble Order of the Garter, tho first, the 
most ronowncd, and tho most honoured of tho Orders of Euro- ' 
pean Knighthood, was instituted by Ehwarh III. about the 
year 1350. Tho exact occasion and period of its institution, 
and tho actual circumstances that attended the foundation of 
tho Order cannot now bo traced out with precision and certainty. 
That tho Order was in existence in tho middle of the fourteenth 
century, cannot bo questioned. It is equally beyond dispute, 
that the Order from the first has borno the samo title, has 
numbered twenty-five Knights, including tho Princk of Wales, 
tho Sovereign being the twenty-sixth, and that it has ever re- 
tained its illustrious reputation. Whatever elso might be wanted 
to complete the details of tho early History of the Order of the 
Garter, has been provided by such Legends as are certain to bo- 
come popular Traditions. Sco Archasologia, xxxi., 104. 

The original statutes of tho Order have undergone continual 
changes; but none of these changos havo affected the funda- 
mental character of tho Institution itsolf. By a Statute of 
Jan. 17th, 1805, it was ordained that the Order should consist 
of the Sovereign, and twenty-five Knights Companions, always 
including in their numbor the Prince of Wales, together also 
with such lineal descendants of George III. as might be elected 
from time to tirao. Special Statutes have since been adopted for 
tho admission of Sovereigns and extra Knights, the latter of 
whom have, however, always been incorporated into the number 
of the " Companions " on the occasion of vacancies. 

The Stalls of the Knights of tho Garter are in the Chapel of 
St. George, at Windsor. Thore their Stall-Plates are charged 
with their arms, and overhead aro displayed their Banners. The 
Stall-Plates (369 in number in the year 1757) now at Windsor, 
were evidently emblazoned and fixed in tho time of Henry VI. ; 
their Helms alone would determine the period; and they are 
amongst the most valuable and interesting of our national 
heraldic rocords. See Chap. XXXIII. 



Digitized by Google 



PLATE LIV. CiiATTfcB xx., p. Ml. 

Ineiguta of thu Order of thk (J ahtkk. 
Noa 580a., 590d„ 500b., 590c., and 500.— Tha Star, tfw Lmer Geonje, U,e C&lt;Jlar 
ami the Gwrge, ami the Garter of tlie Order. 



Digitized by Google 



ORDERS OF KNIGHTHOOD. 



841 



These most valuable and interesting Garter-Plates are offi- 
cially under the guardianship and care of Garter King of Arms ; 
and all that can be desired on their behalf is, that they always 
may find such a guardian and protector as they now possess in 
Sir Charles George Young. See Archaiologia, xxxi., 164. 

The Insignia of the Order are the Garter and Motto, the Star, 
the Ribbon and Badge, and the Collar with the George ; and the 
costume consists of the Surcoat, Hat, and Mantle. See Plate 
LIV. 

The Garter, No. 590, PI. LIV., charged with the Motto " Honi 
soit QUI mal Y pense," in letters of gold, with golden borders, 
buckle and pendant, was originally of light blue, but now (as 
it has been since the commencement of the reign of George I.) 
it is dark blue. It is worn on the left leg below the knee, 
Nos. 288 a, and 591 a, PI. XLIII., and No. 290, PI. XLIV.; but 
by Her Majesty the Queen, the Sovereign of the Order, the 
Garter is worn on the left arm above the elbow, as in No. 292, 
PI. XLIV. 

The Mantle is of blue velvet, lined with white taffeta. It has 
the Badge upon the left shoulder, and is fastened with a rich 
cordon and tassels. 

The Hood and the Surcoat are of crimson velvet, the latter 
being lined like the Mantle. 

Tho Hoi is of black velvet, lined with white taffeta. It is 
decorated with a lofty plume of white Ostrich Feathers, in the 
centre of which is a tuft of black Heron's Feathers, the whole 
being attached to the Hat by a clasp of Diamonds. 

The Badge is circular, and is formed of a buckled Garter, with 
the Motto, enclosing the Cross of St George on white enamel ; 
Nos. 591, 592, PI. XLHI. 

The Star is tho Badge irradiated with eight rays, first ordered 
by Charles I. The rays are of silver, or diamonds. The Star 
is worn on tho left breast ; No. 590 a, PI. XLIII. 

The Collar and the George wore added to the Insignia by 



Digitized by Google 



342 



ORDERS OF KNIGHTHOOD. 



Henry VII. Tho Collar is of gold, weighing thirty-six ounces, 
and consists of twenty-six pieces, alternately buckled garters, 
and interlaced knots of cords. Tho garters encircle alternately 
a red rose charged with a white one, and a white rose charged 
with a red one ; No. 590 b, PL XLI V. 

Tho George, executed in coloured enamel, is a figure of St 
Georgo on his charger, in tho act of piercing the dragon with 
his lance. It forms a Pendant to tho Collar; No. 590 c. A 
second George, distinguished as tho ** Lesser George " has tho same 
dovice of gold, charged upon an enamelled ground, and encircled 
by a buckled Garter, the whole forming an oval ; No. 590 n. 
This Georgo is worn depending from the Bibbon of the Order. 
It appears originally to have been black, but Queen Elizabeth 
changed tho Ribbon to a light blue, and by George I. it was 
again changed to the dark bluo, of which hue it still continues. 
The Ribbon passes over tho left shoulder, and crosses the figure 
both in front and behind. 

Tho Ribbon with its George are now commonly worn by 
Knights of tho Garter as accessories of their ordinary costume ; 
tho Star and tho Garter are also added in evening dress. 

The Officers of the Order are 

The Prelate, always the Bishop of Winchester. 

The Chancellor, now tho Bishop of Oxford. 

(Tho First Chancellor of tho Order was Richard Beauchamp, 
Bishop of Salisbury, to whom and to his successors in that See 
tho Chancellorship was granted by a Charter of Edward IV. 
From tho year 1534 till 1671, the dignity was in the hands of 
laymen ; but it was recovered from Charles II. for tho See of 
Salisbury by Bishop Ward. In 183G, Berkshiro, in which St 
George's Chapel is situated, was attached to the Diocese of 
Oxford, when tho Chancellorship of tho Garter passed to the 
Bishops of that See.) 

Both the Prelate and tho Chancellor wear their own proper 
Badgo of tho Order attached to a bluo Ribbon, with their epis- 



Digitized by Google 



ORDERS OF KNIGHTHOOD. 



343 



copal robes : the Badge of the PRELATE is St. George on horse- 
back killing tho dragon, of gold enamelled, encompassed by the 
Garter, and ensigned by an episcopal mitre : and the Badge of 
the Chancellor is a red rose enamelled in gold, having on tho 
reverse tho Arms of St. George, and on both sides encircled by 
the Garter. In the time of Edward VI. the Badge of tho Chan- 
cellor was a Cross of the Order, with a red rose charged upon 
a white one of gold, and encompassed with a garland of red and 
white roses. 

The other Officers of the Order are, 

The Begistrar ; tho Dean of Windsor. His Badge is of gold, 
with a representation of the Register of the Order enamelled in 
crimson, relieved with gold, charged with two gold pens in Sal- 
tiro enamelled proper, the whole surmounted with a Crown, over 
a small compartment with the letters G. R. III. 

The Herald : Garter King of Arms. His Badge is of gold, 
having on both sides the Arms of St. George impaled with those 
of the Sovereign, encircled with the Garter, the whole en- 
amelled, and ensigned with the Imperial Crown. 

And, the Usher of tlie Black Bod. 

Knights of the Garter place after their names the Initials 
K. G., which tako precedence of all other titles. On tho death 
of any Knight, the Insignia which he had worn are returned by 
his nearest representative to tho Sovereign ; a usago which has 
prevailed sinco the time of Charles II. 

Several fine examples of the monumental Effigies of Knights 
of tho Garter have been preserved ; but it is singular that tho 
Effigies of Edward 1IL himself, and his eldest Son, tho Black 
Prince, are without any of the Insignia of their famous Order ; 
in his Will also the Black Prince takes no notice whatever of 
tho Order of tho Gaiter. Tho effigies of Sir William Fitz- 
Waren, K.G., a.d. 1363, at W'antage, and of Sir Richard Pem- 
bridge, K.G., about 1380, in the navo of Hereford Cathedral, are 
memorials of Knights Founders of the Ordor. Othor fine sculp- 



Digitized by Google 



344 



ORDERS OF KNIGHTHOOD. 



tured Effigies aro those of Kichahd Beauchamp, K.G., Earl of 
Warwick, 1439, at Warwick; of Sir William Phillip, K.G., 
styled Lord Bardolf, 1441, at Hoveringham, Notts; of John 
Beaufort, K.G., 1444, at Wimborno Minster, Dorsetshire ; of 
John Talbot, K.G., the great Earl of Shrewsbury, 1453, at 
Whitchurch, Salop ; of Sir Robert Harcourt, K.G. (who also 
wears the Yorkist Collar,) 1471, at Stanton Harcourt; of John 
De la Pole, K.G., Duko of Suffolk, 1491, at Wingfiold; and of 
Sir Giles Daubeney, K.G., in Westminster Abbey, a.d. 1507. 
The Knight last named is represented, sculptured in alabaster, 
(the alabaster still retains much of its original colouring,) with 
tho Garter, Collar, George, Mantle and Badge of the Order, worn 
over his armour ; and on the pommel of his sword-hilt ho has a 
small shield of Daubeney — gu. y four fusiU conjoined in /esse arg. 
The Effigy of Sir William Phillip also is a very noble work, and 
1 must particularly notice the adjustment of tho Garter about tho 
leg, which is admirably shown : this Knight shews his alliance 
with the House of Lancaster by wearing the Collar of SS. 
There also are Brasses to Sir S. de Felbryge, K.G., a.d. 1416 ; to 
Lord Camoys, K.G., (" Strenuus miles de gartero,") a.d. 1424 ; to 
the Earl of Essex, K.G., 1483, No. 591 a, PI. XLIII. ; and to 
Sir T. Boleyn, K.G., a.d. 1538, at Hover, who is habited over his 
armour in tho full insignia of the Order. No. 290, PL XL1V., 
represents tho adjustment of the Garter about the leg of the 
effigy of the Duke of Suffolk ; and No. 288 a, PL XLIII., is 
the Garter of Lord Camoys. 

In the middlo ages, the Ladies of Knights were occasionally 
associated with tho Order of the Garter, but before tho close of 
the sixteenth century, this singular association fell into disuse. 
The effigies of Lady Harcourt, the wife of Sir Robert Har- 
court, K.G., and of tho Duchess of Suffolk, at Euelme in 
Oxfordshire, have tho Garter; the former lady wears it upon 
her left arm, No. 292, PI. XLIV., and the latter adjusts it about 
her wrist after the manner of a bracelet. 



Digitized by Google 



PLATE LV. Chaiteu xx., p. 345. 

Insignia o f the Order of the Thistle. 
No8. 593, 598n , 593a„ and 593c. — The Star, the Jinthje t the CtJhirand the Jexcel 

of the Order. 



Digitized by Google 



ORDERS OF KNIGHTHOOD. 



3-45 



8. The Most Noble and Most Ancient Order of the Thistle, 
of Scotland. 

This Order is supposed to havo been originally instituted at 
an early period of Scottish History. ^lt now exists in conformity 
with the Statutes of James II. and Queen Anne, the latter dated 
1703. By a subsequent statute of the year 1827, the order con- 
sists of the Sovereign and sixteen Knights. 

The Star of this Order, worn on the left side, is formed of a 
St. Andrew's Cross of silver, with rays issuing from between 
the points so as to form a lozenge ; in the centre, upon a fiold of 
gold, is a Thistle propor, surrounded by a circle of green enamel, 
charged with the Motto in golden letters ; No. 593, PI. LV. 

The Collar, of gold, consists of sixteen Thistlos, alternating 
with as many sprigs of Ruo, four in each group, interlaced, all 
enamelled proper ; No. 593 a, PI. LV. 

Tho Jewel or Badge, attached to the Collar, or worn depending 
from a broad dark green Ribbon which crosses the left shouldor, 
is formed of a Figure of St. Andrew of gold enamelled, his sur- 
coat purpure, and his mantle vert, bearing before him his own 
Cross Saltire, tho whole being irradiated with golden rays, and 
surrounded by an oval bearing the Motto, " Nemo me impdne 
lacessit ;" No. 593 b, PI. LV. The Jewel is also worn as in 
No. 593 o. 

The Order is indicated by the Initials K.T. Tho Insignia are 
returned to the Sovereign on the decease of a Knight. 

Tho Officers of the Order are the Dean, the Lord Lion King of 
Arms, and tho Gentleman Usher of the Green Bod. 

9. The Most Illustrious Order of St. Patrick, of Ireland, 
instituted by George III., Feb. 5, 1783, now consists of the 
Sovereign, the Grand Master, and tweniy-tioo KniglUs. By the original 
Statutes the number of Knights was fifteen, and the Lord-Lieu- 
tenant was Grand Master. See Chap. XXXI II. 

The Insignia arc, 

The Mantle, made of rich sky-blue tabinet, lined with whito 



Digitized by Google 



46 



ORDERS OF KNIGHTHOOD. 



silk, and fastened by a cordon of bluo nilk and gold with tassels. 
On the right shoulder is the Hood, of the same materials as the 
Mantle, and on tho left side is the Star. 

The Ribbon, of sky-blue, four inches in width, is worn over 
the right shoulder, and sustains the Badgo when tho Collar is 
not worn. 

Tho Collar, of gold, is composed of Roses alternating with 
Harps, tied together with knots of gold, the Koses being en- 
amelled alternately white within red, and rod within white, and 
in tho centre is an Imperial Crown surmounting a Harp of gold, 
from which tho Badge is suspended ; No. 594, PI. LVI. 

The Badge or Jewel, of gold, is oval in form. It is surrounded 
with a Wreath of Shamrock, proper, on a gold field; within 
this is a band of sky-blue enamel, charged with tho Motto in 
golden letters ; and within this band tho Cross of St. Patrick, 
No. 61, surmounted by a Trefoil or Shamrock vert, having 
upon each of its Leaves an Imperial Crown. The field of the 
Cross is either argent, or pierced and left open; No. 594b, 
PL LVL 

The Motto is " Quis Separabit, mdcclxxxiii." 

Tho Star, worn on the left side, differs from the Badgo only 
in being circular in form instead of oval, and in substituting for 
tho exterior wreath of Shamrocks, eight rays of silver, four of 
which are larger than the other four ; No. 594 a, PI. LVI. 

The Order is indicated by tho initials, K.P. 

Tho Officers of the Order are, 

Tho Prelate, tho Archbishop of Armagh. 

Tho Oianccllor, tho Archbishop of Dublin. 

Tho Registrar, tho Dean of St Patrick's. 

The Genealogist. The Usher of the Black Rod. 

The Ulster King of Arms. Two Heralds, and Four Pursuivants. 

10. TnE Most Honourable Order of the Bath. 

Amongst the various Kites and Ceremonies attending the 



Digitized by Google 




PLATE LVL Chapter xx., p. :m. 

Insignia of the Oiipek of St. Patric k. 
Nos. 5&lt;Ha., 594b.. and 504.— Ue Star, the Badge, and the Collar and the Bad.je 

of tlu' Ord«-r. 



Digitized by Google 



ORDERS OF KNIGHTHOOD. 



317 



ancient admission of Aspirants to tho Order of Knighthood, 
ono of tho most important was tho symbolical act of Bathing. 
The memory of this usage is still preserved in the titlo of the 
renowned Order of the BatJi, though the rite itself has long 
ceased to be administered. Tho last lingering instances of 
conformity with the primitive observances are recorded to have 
taken place on tho occasion of the Coronation of Charles II., 
April 23, 1661. From that period till the year 1725, the old 
1 nstitution hud fallen into total oblivion ; and accordingly, the 
Order as it now exists, may be said to have been founded by 
Gkorge I., May 25, 1725. 

In 1815 tho Order was completely 'remodelled, and it was 
decreed that it should consist of Three Classes ; and in 1847 it 
was further extended, and new statutes for the government of 
tho Order were promulgated. The Order was again enlarged on 
the 3l8t of January, 1859, when it was ordained that the mem- 
bers should be 985 in number. 

Tho name of Sir Thomas Esturmy, who was created July 17th, 
1204, stands at tho head of the chronological Roll of tho Knights. 
Tho earliest notico of the Badge of tho Order being worn is in 
1614: and the present Motto of the Order first occurs upon tho 
Badge of Sir Edward Walpole, created a Knight of tho Bath, 
April 23rd, 1661. 

The Order of the Bath is now composed of, 

I. Knights Grand Cross, (G.C.B.), who form the "First Class," 
for both naval, military, and diplomatic service In their 
number, tho Sovereign, the Koyal Princes, and certain dis- 
tinguished Foreigners are included ; the Knights themselves are 
50 Naval and Military, and 25 Civil. 

II. KniglUs Commanders, (K.C.B.), also for civil as well as mili- 
tary and naval service. Foreign officers may be admitted as 
honorary K.C.B. All Knights of this 11 Second Class " havo 
tho distinctive appellation of Knighthood, and they wear the 
Insignia of tho Order ; their numbers aro 102 Naval and Military, 



Digitized by Google 



348 ORDERS OF KNIGHTHOOD. 

and 50 Civil ; and it is provided that tliese numbers may bo in- 
creased. 

IH. Companions of the Order (C.B.), both civil, naval, and 
military, constitute the " Third Class," and take precedence of 
Esquires, but are not entitled to the style and title of Knight- 
hood; their numbers are 525 Naval and Military, and 200 
Civil 

The Naval and Military Insignia are, 

The Collar, of gold, in weight thirty ounces, No. 595, PL LVII. ; 
it is composed of nine Imperial Crowns, and eight Roses, Thistles, 
and Shamrocks, issuing from a Sceptre, and enamelled proper, 
all linked together with seventeen knots enamelled argent, and 
having the Badgo as a Pendant. 

The Star, worn by the G.C.B., is formed of Rays of Silver, or 




No. 595 a. — Star of Knights G.C.B. 



Jewels, thereon a golden Maltese Cross, charged with the same 
Device as the Badgo ; No. 505a. Tho K.C.B Star omits the Mai. 
tesc Cross, and is itself in its form a Cross Patoo ; No. 595 u. 



Digitized by Google 



PLATE LV1I. Chard xx, p. 348. 

Insignia of the Ohdkr or the Bath. 
Nos. 5i»5u., 595, nml 505c. — Th* DiiJomatic and Ciril Badge, and (he Collar 
and the Naval and Mriitary Badge of the Order. 



Digitized by Google 



ORDERS OF KNIGHTHOOD. 



Tho Badge is a gold Cross of eight points, enamelled argent. 
In each of the four angles, a Lion of England. In the centre, 
within a circle, gules, charged with tho Motto, tho Rose, Thistle, 
and Shamrock, issuing from a Sceptre, and alternating with three 




No. 595 Star of tho Knights K.C.B. 

Imperial Crowns ; the circle is encompassed with two branches 
of Laurel, which issuo from an azure scroll in base, bearing in 
golden letters tho words, " Icii Dien No. 595 c, Plato LVII. 

This Badge is worn by the G.C.B. pendent from a broad 
red Ribbon across tho left shoulder, and by tho K.C.B. from a 
narrower red Ribbon from the neck ; and by a still narrower 
red Ribbon from tho button-hole. The Cross engraved in VI 
LVII. is worn by the C.B. as their Badge. 

Tho Diplomatic and Civil Insignia are, 
» Tho Badge, of gold, an oval, having the external fillet charged 

with the Motto and encircling the central Device of the Order. 
It is worn by tho Throe Classes with the same distinctions as 
the Military Badge ; but tho C.B. Civil Badge is smaller than 
the Badges of the two higher Classes ; No. 595 n, Tl. LVII. 

The Star of the G.C.B., of silver, has eight rays, and in its 
centre is the red circle with tho Motto, enclosing three Imperial 



Digitized by Google 



360 



ORDERS OF KNIGHTHOOD. 



Crowns upon a Glory of nilver rays. Tho Star of tho K.C.B. 
is tho sarao in form and size with that of tho military K.C.B., 
only omitting tho Laurel- Wreath round tho circle with the 
Motto, and the small Scroll with the Legend, 11 Icn Dien." 

The Motto of tho Order is "Tria JuNcrA in Uno,"— " Three 
united in one" and refers as well to the nnion of tho three realms 
the United Kingdom, as to the throe branches of tho National 
Service, namely, Naval, Military, and Diplomatic or Civil. 

Tho Companions of the ORDER, (C.B.) do not wear any other 
Insignia than their Badge with its Ribbon. 

Tho Stalls of the early G.C.B. are in HuNRY Tilth's chapel, 
Westminster, with tho Stall-Hates and the Banners of the 
Knights, and tho Stall-Plates of tho Esquires; but since 1815 
there has not been any installation of tho Knights, who have be- 
come too numerous a body to bo accommodated in tho Stalls at 
Westminster. 

11. The Most Distinguished Ordkr of St. Michael and St. 
George. 

This Order was founded in the year 1818, for tho purpose of 
bestowing honourable Distinctions upon the Natives of Malta and 
the Ionian Islands. Tho members of tho Order enjoy Rank and 
Precedence immediately after the corresponding Classes of tho 
Bath, for this Order, like the Bath, is divided into KniglUs Grand 
Cross, Knighd Commanders, and Companions. 

Tho Star of tho Knights Grand Cross is formed of seven rays 
of silver, alternating with as many small rays of gold, and 
having over all the Cross of St. Georgo. In the centro, within 
an azuro circle inscribed with tho Motto, is a Figuro of St. 
Michael encountering Satan. 

The Collar of tho same Class of Knights is composed of Lions 
of England and Maltose Crosses alternating, and of tho Mono- 
grams S.M. and S.G. ; in the centro it has the Imperial Crown, 
over two winged Lions, counter-passant guardant, each holding 



Digitized by Google 



ORDERS OF KNIOHTHOOD. 



351 



a Book and seven Arrows. Opposite to these are two similar 
Lions. The whole is of gold, except the Crosses, which are 
enamelled argent; and the several pieces are linked together 
with small gold chains. 

The Badge is a Cross of fourteen points, of white enamel 
edged with gold, having in the centro on either side an azure 
circle with the Motto. On one side, this circle encloses a 11 St. 
Michael," and on the other side a " St. George." The Badge 
is ensigned by an Imperial Crown, and it is worn by Grand 
Crosses attached to the Collar, or from a broad dark blue Ribbon 
with a scarlet stripe, passing from the right shoulder to tho 
loft side. 

Tho Mantle is of dark blue satin, lined with scarlet silk, fastened 
with cordons of blue, scarlet and gold, and on tho left side it 
has the Star. 

The CJiapeau is of blue satin, lined with scarlet, and surmounted 
by a plumo of white and black Ostrich Feathers. 

The Star of the Knights Commanders is silver of four rays, having 
a Cross of eight points set saltiro-wisc, and surmounted by a Cross 
of St. George, and having the same centre as the other Star. 

The Badge is the same, and is worn suspended to a narrow 
Ribbon, of the same colours, from tho neck. 

Tho Companions wear the same Badge, of smaller size, from 
a still narrower Ribbon at the button-hole. 

The Motto of the Order is, " Auspicium Mklioris Mvi." 

In addition to the Sovereign and tho Grand Master, the 
Officers of tho Order are the Prelate, ClianccUor, Secretary, and 
King of Arms. 

12. The Most Exalted Order of the Star of India. 

In the month of June of tho year 18G1, The Quekn instituted 
the new " Order of tho Star of India," for the express purpose of 
rendering high Honour to conspicuous Loyalty and Merit in the 
Princes, Chiefs and People of Her Indian Empire. The Order 



Digitized by Google 



352 



ORDERS OF KNIGIITIIOOD. 



consists of the Sovereign, a Grand Master, always to be the 
(Jovornor-Genoral of India, and twenty-fine Knights with such 
Honorary Knights as the Crown may appoint. The Knights are 
to include both military, naval, and civil officers, and natives of 
India. See Chap. XXXIII. 
Tho Insignia arc, 

The Collar, No. 596, PL LIX., which is composed of the 
heraldic Koso of England, and the Lotus Flower, and two Talm- 
Branches in sal tire tied with a Ribbon, alternately, all of gold 
enamelled proper, and connected by a double golden chain. In 
the centre is tho Imperial Crown, from either side of which tho 
series of Dovices commences with a Lotus. From the Crown 
depends the Badge, consisting of a brilliant Mullet, or Star of 
five Points, to which is suspended an oval Medallion containing 
an onyx cameo profile Bust of the Queen, encircled by the Motto 
in letters of gold on an enriched Border of light blue enamel ; 
No. 596 a, PL LIX. 

Tho Investment Badge, to bo worn pendont from a Ribbon of 
palo blue with whito borders, is the same in design as the Collar 
Badge, but the Star, tho setting of the Cameo, and the Motto are 
all of diamonds. 

The ,SW, of diamonds, is also a mullet, on an irradiated field 
of gold. It is surrounded by an azuro fillet, bordered with gold, 
and charged with the Motto in diamonds. The whole is encircled 
by wavy Rays of gold ; No. 596 b, PL LIX. 

The Motto is, " Heaven's Light our Guide." 

13. Decorations of Honour. 

Crosses, Medals, and Clasps, with Ribbons to which they should 
bo attached, have been conferred for signal services, both naval 
and military. These Medals commemorate the services and tho 
gallant actions of the Navy and Army of England in all parts of 
the world. Clasps, or small Bars, are attached to the Medal- 
Ribbons, each bearing the name of some particular action. 



Digitized by Google 



PIRATE LXL Chapter xx , p. 352. 

Insignia of the Okdkr of the Btak of India. 
No*. 596b., 596, 596a.- The Star, the Collar and the Badge of the Order. 



Digitized by Google 



ORDERS OF KNIGHTHOOD. 



353 



The Waterloo Medal, now rarely to be seen, is of silver, with 
the Head of the Prince Regent, and a winged Victory, and the 
words, " Waterloo," " Wellington." The Ribbon is crimson, 
with a narrow stripe of blue near each edge. 

The Crimean Medal is silver, and is worn from a blue Ribbon 
with yellow edges for the Crimea itself, and from a yellow 
Ribbon with blue edges for the Baltic. There are separate Clasps 
for Sevastopol, Balaclava, Inkerman, and Alma. 

In 1830 and 1831, " Good Service Medals" of silver were 
instituted, and Rules wore framed for their distribution to 
meritorious soldiers, seamen, and marines. The Naval Medal 
is worn from a blue, and the Military from a crimson Ribbon. 

There are many other Medals for various services in the 
Peninsula, in India, &amp;o. &amp;c. 

The Name, Rank, and Regiment or Ship, of every recipient of 
a Medal is engraven upon it. 

14. The Victoria Cross, instituted by Her Majesty the Queen 
in 1856, is the decoration of eminent personal valour in actual 
conflict with the enemy. It is a Maltese Cross of bronze, charged 
with the Imperial Crown and Crest, and has the words u for 
valour" upon a scroll, No. 597, PI. XLVI. This Cross is worn 
on the left breast attached to a blue Ribbon for the Navy, and to 
a red Ribbon for the Army. A Bar is attached to the ribbon 
for eveiy act of such gallantry as would have won the Cross. 
This noble decoration is given only for " conspicuous bravery," 
without any distinction whatever of rank or other circum- 
stances. In the collection of Pictures entitled the " Victoria 
Cross Gallery," painted by Mr. Desanges, the incidents — 
memorable in English History, which havo been rewarded 
with Victoria Crosses, are set forth with vivid and graphic 
effect. 

15. Foreign Orders and Medals. 

The Insignia of Foreign Orders of Knighthood and Medals of 
Honour, the gift of Foreign Sovereigns, cannot be accepted and 

2 a 



Digitized by Google 



354 



DECORATIONS OF HONOUR. 



worn by any British subject, without the express and especial 
sanction and authority of the Queen. 

The Foreign Insignia and Medals that of late years have been 
bestowed in considerable numbers upon British officers, soldiers, 
seamen, and marines, are those of tho Legion of Honour of France, 
aud the French Military Medal ; the Sardinian War Medal, and 
the Order of the Medjidie of Turkey. 

16. The Legion ok Honour comprehends 44 Grand Crosses," 
44 Grand Officers," 44 Commanders," 44 Officers," and 44 Knights." 

Tho Decoration is a Cross of ten Points of white enamel edged 
with gold; the Points are connected by a Wreath of Laurel 
proper, and in tho centre, within an azure circle charged with 
tho words, " Napol£on III., Emp. des Francois," is a Head of 
tho Emperor. The Cross is ensigned by the Imperial Crown of 
France, and is worn attached to a red Ribbon. The Grand 
Officers also wear upon the right breast a silvor Star, charged 
with the Imperial Eagle. The same Star is worn on the left 
breast by the Knights Grand Cross, and their Cross is at- 
tached to a broad red Ribbon which passes over their right 
shoulder. 

The French Military Medal is worn from a yellow Ribbon with 
green Borders. 

17. The Sardinian War Medal is charged with the Cross of 
Savoy, and is suspended from a sky-blue Ribbon. 

18. The Turkish Order of the Medjidie has fivo Classes. The 
Badge is a silver Sun of seven triple Rays, the Device of tho 
Crescent and Star alternating with the Rays. In the centre, 
upon a circle of red enamel, is the Legend, (in the vernacular), 
14 Zeal, Honour, Loyalty," and the date 1852, (Turkish, 1268); 
within this, on a golden field, the name of the Sultan. This 
Decoration varies in size for the various 44 Classes " of the Order. 
The First three Classes suspend the Badge round the neck from 
a red Ribbon having green Borders ; and tho Fourth and Fifth 
(.'lasses wear it upon the left Breast by a similar Ribbon. 



Digitized by Google 



FOREIGN ORDERS OF KNIGHTHOOD. 



355 



A Star, closely resembling the Badgo, is also worn by the 
First Class on the left, and by the Second Class on the right 
breast. 

19. The Austrian and Spanish Order of the Golden Fleece, 
having numbered many Englishmen amongst its Members, 
claims a brief notice in this place. Established in the year 1429 
by Philip the Good, Duke of Burgundy, the Order received its 
statutes in 1431 ; and on the marriago of Mary, daughter of 
Charles the Bold of Burgundy, with Maximilian of Austria, it 
became an Austrian in place of a Burgundian Order. Since the 
year 1748, this celebrated Order has been claimed, and its pri- 
vileges have been exercised by both Austria and Spain. The 
original motto, " Autre n'auray," declaring that a Knight of 
the Golden Fleece would accept no other knightly distinction, 
shows the high estimation in which this Order was held from 
the time of its foundation. The decoration of the Golden Fleece 
itself is worn suspended from a red ribbon, or from a splendid 
collar composed of steels and flints represented as in the act of 
emitting sparks of fire. 

20. The Danish Orders of the Dannehrog and the White 
Elephant, the latter eminently distinguished throughout Europe, 
are now regarded with peculiar interest in England. 

The Order of the Dannebroo, or " the Banner of the Danes" 
was originally founded, a.d. 1219, by Waldemar II., to comme- 
morate his having received from heaven a red banner charged 
with a white cross, while fighting with the pagans of Esthonia. 
The Cross of this Order is paicc, enamelled white with red edges, 
surmounted by the King's cypher crowned, and having within 
each angle a Royal Crown. In front of the Cross, at the centre, 
is a crowned W, the initial of Waldemar ; and at its extremities 
the words, Gud og Kong en, " God and the King." On the re- 
verse are the three dates of the foundation of the Order, its re- 
newal and reform, 1219, 1671, 1808. The Collar is formed of 
the letter W and the Cross alternately, linked together with 

2 a 2 



Digitized by Google 



356 



FOREIGN ORDERS OF KNIGHTHOOD. 



chains of gold. This Order has four Classes : — Chrand Com- 
mander8 f Grand Crosses, Commanders, and Knights. 

The Order of the White Elephant, said to have been founded 
early in the fifteenth century, was renewed in 1458 by Chris- 
tian I., and by him ordained to consist of thirty knights in 
addition to the Princes of the Royal Family. The Badge is an 
Elephant of white enamel with golden tusks, having a castle on 
its back. It is worn from a broad sky-blue watered ribbon, pass- 
ing over the right shoulder, or from a collar formed of white 
elephants and castles. The Star, of eight points of brilliants, 
has its centre charged with the Danish Cross within a wreath of 
laurel in enamel. 



No. 627.— White Hart lodged. Badge of Richard II., from his Effigy 
at Westminster. See page 263. 




Digitized by Google 



No. 298. — Crown of Herald Kings-of-Arms. 



CHAPTER XXI. 

OFFICIAL AND CORPORATE HERALDRY. 

At an early period in the History of Heraldry, Shields of Arms 
were assigned to certain Officers, and also to Corporate Bodies 
whether Civil or Ecclesiastical. Armorial Insignia of this Class 
possess many qualities and associations, which render them 
peculiarly attractive to students of Heraldry. So numerous are 
the Arms that would be comprehended under this Class, that 
within the limits of a general Handbook it is not possible to 
describe and blazon more than a very few illustrative examples. 
A tolerably complete Manual of Official and Corporate Heraldry 
would form a goodly volume in itself. 

1. Arms of the Archbishops and Bishops, and of their several 
Sees. The Arms are the Insignia of the Sees, and each Prelate 
impales tho arms of his own See on the dexter side, with his 
own paternal arms on tho sinister side. 

1. Archbishops. 

Canterbury: Az., an archiepiscopal staff, in pale, or, cnsigned 
with a cross patee arg., surrmmnted by a jtall of the last, fimbriated 
and /ringed gold, and charged with four crosses formed fitchees sa. 
No. 255, PI. XIV. 



Digitized by Google 



358 



OFFICIAL AND OJlUUKATL HERALDRY. 



Fine examples exist at Canterbury, Croydon, Guilford, and 
All Souls College, Oxford. 

York : Gu., two keys in saltire arg., in chief an Imperial Crown 
of England. The arms of the See of York were originally the 
same as those of Canterbury. The change was made about 
a.d. 1540. 

Armagh: Az., an archiepiscopal staff, in pale, arg., ensigned with 
a cross patee or, surmounted by a pall of the second, fimbriated and 
fringed gold, and charged with four crosses forme'es fitche'es sa. 

Dublin : The same as Armagh. The student will observe the 
difference between the arms of the See of Canterbury and those 
of Armagh and Dublin. 

2. Bishops. 

London, Durham, Winchester; see p. 96. 

Bangor : Gu,, a bend or, guttee-de-poix, between two mullet* arg., 
pierced of the field. 

Bath and WELU : Az., a salt ire quarterly quartered or and arg. 

Carlisle : Arg., on a ci'oss sa., a mitre labelled or. 

Chester : Gu., three mitres, two and one, labelled or. 

Cnicn ester : upon a shield azure a seated Figure, represented 
as in the act of benediction, and having a sword proceeding out 
of his mouth. This Figure without doubt is that of the Saviour, 
and the sword has direct reference to the passages in the Book 
of Revelation, Chap, i., 16, and xix., 15 and 21. The blazon 
given in the Peerages, which 1 do not profess to comprehend, is 
as follows : az., a Prefer John sitting upon a tombstone, in his left 
hand a mound, his right extended, all or ; on his head a linen mitre 
and in his mouth a sword jypr. This mysterious sentence must 
have been the result of a strange misapprehension ; possibly the 
figure may have been considered to be that of St. John the 
Evangelist, " the Elder." See Notes and Queries, 2nd Series, 
iv., 376, for a notice of a Prester John, who certainly has no con- 
nection with the See of Chichester. 



Digitized by Google 



OFFICIAL AND CORPORATE HEKALDRY. 359 

Ely : Gu., three crowns, two and one, or. 

ExBTfcR : Gu., a sword, in pale, pp., hilt or, surmounting two 
keys, in saltire, gold. 

Gloucester and Bristol: Az., two keys, in saltire, or, for Glou- 
cester; impaling, Sa., three open crowns, in pale, or, for Bristol. 

Hereford : Gu., three leopanVs faces reversed, jessant de-lys, or. 

Lichfield : Per pale gu. and arg., a cross potent and quadrate, 
(No. 91), between four crosses patees, all counter changed. 

Lincoln : Gu., two lions of England ; on a chief az., the Blessed 
Virgin, sitting, crowned and sceptred, and holding the Holy Child, or. 

Llandaff : Sa., two pastoral staves, in saltire, or and arg. ; on a 
chief az., three mitres labelled gold. 

M anchester : Or, on a pale engrailed gu., three mitres labelled 
gold ; on a canton of the second, three bendlets enhanced arg. 

Norwich : Az., three mitres labelled, two and one, or. 

Oxford : Sa., a fesse arg. ; in chief, three ladys heads, issuant 
arrayed and veiled, arg., crowned or ; in base, an ox of the second, 
passant over a ford ppr. 

Peterborough : Gu., between four crosslcts JitcHes, two keys, in 
saltire, or. 

Kipon : Arg., on a saltire gu., two keys, in saltire, wards towards the 
base, or ; on a chief of the second, an Agnus Dei. 

Rochester : Arg., on a saltire gu., an escallop-shell or. 

St. Asaph : Sa., two keys, in saltire, addorsed arg. 

Sr. David's : Sa., on a cross or, Jive cinquefoils of the first. 

Salisbury : Az., the Blessed Virgin and Child, in her left hand a 
sceptre, or. 

Worcester: Arg., ten torteaux, 4, 3, 2, 1. 

For the arms of the Sees of Ireland and of the Colonies, 1 niu*t 
refer to the Peerages. 

3. Deans and Chapters. 

Of this group of arms I must be content to give four examples 
as specimens of their class. 



Digitized by Google 



» 



360 OFFICIAL AND CORPORATE HERALDRY. 

Deanery of Canterbury : Az., on a cross arg. the letter X sa., 
surmounted by the letter I of the last. 

Deanery of York : two keys, in saltire addorsed, arg., between 
three plates, two in /esse and one in base, in chief a Royal crown or. 

Deanery of Westminster: The arms of the Confessor, No. 78, 
Fl. I. ; on a chief or., between two roses gu., a pale charged with France 
Modern and England quarterly; No. 598, PI. XLVII. 

Deanery of St. Paul's : the arms of the See, having in chief 
the letter D gold. 

4. Monasteries of the Middle Ages. 

Of the Arms of these Institutions, often of great interest to the 
student of historical Heraldry, I have space for three examples 
only. 

The Abbey of St. Alban : Az.,a saltire or, No. 633, PL LXXVII. 
and No. 466, PI. LI. 

Westminster Abbey : Az., on a chief indented or, to the dexter 
a pastoral staff in pale, and to the sinister a mitre gu. ; No. 599, 
PI. XLVII. 

Castle-Acre Priory, Norfolk : Arg., a cross chequee or and az., 
between twelve crossleis fitche'es sa. This cross chequee indicates 
the close connection that existed between Castle -Acre Priory and 
the family of the De Warrennes. 

5. Universities and Colleges. 

University of Oxford: Az., on a book open ppr., garnished 
or, having on the dexter side seven seah gold, the words Dominus 
Illuminatio Mea, between three crowns of the last ; No. 600, PI. 
XLVII. 

University College, Oxford, (a.d. 872 and 1219): Az., a cross 
patonce between four martlets or. 

Balliol College, (a.d. 126.} and 1284): On., an orle arg. 
Merton College, (a.d. 1274): Or, three chevronele, per pale, the 



Digitized by Google 



SHIELDS OF Ml MS &amp; ROYAL BADGES. 




Digitized by Google 



OFFICIAL AND CORPORATE HERALDRY. 361 

first and the third az. and gu., the second counter changing the same 
tinctures. 

Worcester College, (a.d. 1283 and 1713): Or, two chevrons gu., 
between six martlets sa, 3, 2, and 1. 

EzETER College, (a.d. 1316 and 1404): Arg., two bends nebulee 
sa., within a bordure of (lie second, charged with eight pairs of keys, 
addorsed and interlaced in the rings, the wards in chief or. 

Oriel College, (a.d. 1323) : England, within a bordure engrailed 
arg. 

Queen's College, (a.d. 1340) : Or, three eagles displayed gu. 

New College, (a.d. 1379) : Arg., two chevrons sa., between three 
roses gu., impaling the arms of the See of W inchester, the whole 
within a Garter of the Order ensigned with a Mitre. 

Lincoln College, (a.d. 1429 and 1479): Per pale of three ; 
1. barry of six arg. and az., in chief three lozenges gu., for Hugh 
Fleming, Bishop of Lincoln, first Founder; 2. on a field arg., the 
arms of the See of Lincoln, ensigned with a mitre ; 3. vert, three stags 
tripping arg., attired or, for Thomas Scott, Archbishop of York, 
second Founder. 

All Souls College, (a.d. 1437): Or, a chevron between three 
cinquefoils gu. 

Magdalen College, (a.d. 1456) : Lozcngee erm. and sa., on a chief 
of the last three lilies slipped arg. 

Brazen-Nose College, (a.d. 1515): Per pah of three; 1. arg., 
a chevron sa., between three roses gu., barbed vert, seeded or, for 
William Smith, Bishop of Lincoln, Founder ; 2. See of Lincoln ; 
3. quarterly, 1 and 4, arg., a chevron between three bugle-horns stringed 
sa. ; 2 and 3, arg., a chevron between three crosses-crosslcis sa. 

Corpus Ciiristi College, (a.d. 1516) : Per pale of three ; 1. az., 
a pelican in its piety or, for Kichard Fox, Bishop of Winchester, 
Founder ; 2. See of Winchester ; 3. sa., a chevron or, between three 
owls arg., on a chief or as mariy roses gu., for Bishop Oldham. 

Christ Church College, (a.d. 1532 and 1546): Sa., on a cross 
engrailed arg., a lion pass, gu., between four leopard's faces az. : on 



Digitized by Google 



3G2 



OFFICIAL AND CORPORATE HERALDRY. 



a chief or, a rose of the third, barbed vert, seeded of the fifth, between 
two Coniish clwughs ppr. 

Trinity College: (Founded -the first after the Reformation - 
by Sir Thomas Pope, in 1556) ; 

Arms : Per pale or and az., on a chevron between three griffins 
heads erased t four fleurs de lys, all counterchanged. 

Crest : Two griffins heads addorsed, issuing from a crest-coronet, 
per pale or and az., counterchanged. 

St. John's College, (a.d. 1557): Gu., on a canton erm.a lioncel 
rampt. sa. ; a bordure of the last, charged with eighty estoiles or ; on the 
f esse point an annulet gold, for difference. 

Jksus College, (a.d. 1571) : Az., three stags tripping arg. 

Wadham College, (a.i&gt;. 1613): Gu., a chevron between three roses 
arg., for Wadham ; impaling, gu., a bend or,between three escallops 
arg., for Petri:. 

Pembroke College, (a.d. 1620) : Per pale az. and gu., three lions 
rampt. arg. ; a chief per pale or and arg., charged tcith a rose gu, to 
the dexter, and to the sinister a thistle vert. 

UNIVERSITY of Cambridge: Gu., on a cross crm., between four 
lions of England, a Bible lying fesse-wise of the field, clasped and 
garnished gold, the clasps in base; No. 601, PL XL, VII. 

St. Peter's College, Cambridge, (a.d. 1256): Or, three 
pallets gu., tcithin a bordure of the last, charged with eight ducal 
coronets or. 

Clare Hall, (a.d. 1326 ; Foundress, Elizabeth, daughter of 
Earl Gilbert de Clare, and wife of John de Burgh, Earl of 
Ulster) : De Clare impaling Ulster, the wlwle within a bordure sa., 
guttee d'or. 

Pembroke Hall, (a.d. 1343); Foundress, Mary de Chastillon, 
wife of Earl Aymer de Valence) : De Valence dimidiating Chas- 
tUlon, — vair, three pallets gu., on a chief or a label of three points az. 

Corpus Christi College, (a.d. 1351): Quarterly, 1 ami 4, gu., a 
pelican in its piety ppr. ; 2 and 3, az., three lilies arg. 



Digitized by Google 



OFFICIAL AND CORPORATE HERALDRY. 363 

Trinity Hall, (a.d. 1351): Sa., within a bordure engrailed, a 
(.rcsceni enn. 

Queen's College, (a.d. 1441): The Arms of the Foundress, 
Queen Margaret of Anjon, No. 352, PI. XXIII. : see p. 307. 

King's College, (a.d. 1441 ; the Grant of Anns direct from 
King IIknry VI., by patent under the Great Seal, a.d. 1449),— 
Sa., three roses arg., barbed vert, seeded or ; on a chief per pale az. and 
gu., a fieur de-lys and a lion or. 

Catherine Hall, (a.d. 1497): (?«., a Catherine-wheel or. 

Jesus College, (a.d. 1597) : Arg., on a /esse between three cock's 
heads erased sa., crested and wattled gu., a mitre or, all icithin a bordure 
of the third, charged with eight ducal coronets gold. 

Christ's College, (a.d. 1505): Frame Modern and England, 
within a bordure compome arg. and az. ; No. 479, 1*1. XXXII. 

St. John's College, (a.d. 1508) : No. 479, PI. XXXII. 

Magdalen College, (a.d. 1541): Quarterly, per pale indented or 
and az.: in the la/ md 4th quarters, a bend of the second, frettee, 
between two martlets, gold ; in the 2nd and 3rd quarters, an eagle dis- 
played of the first. 

Trinity College, (a.d. 1546 :) Arg., a checron between three roses 
gu., barbed vert, sealed or ; on a chief of the second, a Lion of England 
between two Bibles pale- wise gold, clasped and garnished of the last, 
clasps to the dexter. 

Gonyille and Caius College, (a.d. 1548): Arg., on a chevron 
between two couple-closes sa., three escallops or, for Gonville ; impaling 
the arms of Caius, of which the original grant from Dalton, 
Norroy of Arms, runs thus — u Golde, semyed with flowrc gentle, in 
the myddle of the cheyfe sengrene, resting upon the heads of ij serpenles 
in pale, their tayles hiyltc together, alle in proper color, restingc uj&gt;on 
a square marble stone vert, betwenc their brestcs a booh sable, garnished 
gewles, buckles or: betokening by the book Learning; by the ij 
serpentes uppon the square marble stone Wisdom and Cimce, 
founded and stayed upon Vertue's stable stone ; by sengrene 
and flowrc gentlo Immortalitie that never shall fade, as though 



Digitized by Google 



301 OFFICIAL AND CORPORATE HERALDRY. 

thus 1 shulde say, Ex prudentia et literis, virtutis potra firmatis, 
imruortalitas ; that is to say, By wisdome and learning, graffted 
in grace and vertue, men come to immortal i tie." The impaled 
arms are within a Bordure componee arg. and sa. 

Emmanuel College, (a.d. 1584): Arg., a lion rampt. az., holding 
in his dexter paw a chaplct of laurel vert, in chief the word Emmanuel 
gold charged upon a scroll sa. 

Sidney Sussex College (a.d. 1595): Arg., a bend engrailed sa., 
for Badcliffe ; impaling, or, a pheon az., for Sidney. 

DOWNING College, (a.d. 1800) : Barry of eigfit arg. and vert, a 
griffin segreant or, within a bordure az., charged with eight roses of the 
first, barbed and seeded ppr. 

6. Public Schools. 

Eton College, (a.d. 1440) : Az., three lilies, slipped and leaved, 
2 and 1 , arg. ; on a chief per pale az. and gu., a fleur-de-lys of 
France, and a lion of England. 

Amongst the Archives of Eton is the original Grant of Arms 
by HESRY VI. It is one of tho most beautiful examples of 
Blazonry that I have ever seen, and it remains in perfect pre- 
servation. Tho Seals appended to this and to other documents 
at Eton are of the highest interest 

Winchester School : Tho same arms as New College, Oxford. 

7. The College of Arms, or Herald's College, London ; and 
the Lyon Office of Arms, Edinburgh. 

The College of Arms:— Arms: Arg., a cross of St. Ocorgc, 
cantoning four doves, tlieir dexter wings elevated and inverted az. 
No. G02, Chap. XXVII. 

Crest : From a crest-coronet or, a dove rising az. 

Supporters : Two lions rampt. guard, org., ducally crowned or. 

These insignia are derived from Wriothsley, one of tho early 
Garters. 



Digitized by Google 



CREST. SHIELDS &amp; VICTORIA CROSS 




VICTORIA CROSS. 



ARMS of the HKRALDS 
GARTER NOHHDY 




('l.AKKSriF.rx. ULSTER 




r:. e X1.VI 



Digitized by Googh 



OFFICIAL AND CORPORATE HERALDRY. 



3G5 



The Heralds' Office, or Lyon Office, of Scotland: Arg., a 
lion sejant affrontS gu., holding in his dexter paw a thistle slipped 
vert, and in the sinister an escutcheon of the second ; on a chief az., 
the cross saltire of St. Andrew. These arms date from the year 
1681. 

8. The Herald Kings-of-Arms. 

Garter : Arg., the cross of St. George ; on a chief az., a ducal 
coronet encircled with a garter of the Order, between a lion of Eng- 
land and a fleur-de-lys, all or. No. 603, PI. XLVI. 

Korroy : Arg., the Cross of St. George ; on a chief per pale az. 
and gu., between a fleur-de-lys and a key, the latter pale-wise, a lion 
of England crotcned, all or. No. G04, PI. XLVI. 

Clarencieux : Arg., the cross of St. George ; on a chief gu., a 
lion of England, crowned or. No. G05, PL XLVI. 

Lyon : The Arms of the Lyon Office of Arms. 

Ulster : Arg., the cross of St. George ; on a chief az., between a 
harp and a portcullis, a lion of England, all or, the harp stringed of 
the first. No. 606, PI. XLVI. 

■ 

9. Public Institutions. 

The Royal Society of London: a.d. 1663. Arg., a quarter of 
England. 

The Society of Antiquaries of London: Arg., on a cross of 
St. George a Royal Crown or. Crest: An antique Roman lamp 
or, inflamed ppr. ; with the Motto, above the Crest, 11 Non Ex- 
tinguetur." 

10. Municipal and other Corporations. 

London. Arms, No. 139, p. 54 : Arg., the cross of St. George 
cantoning in the .first quarter a sword erect gu. See Sword in 
Chap. IX. 

Crest : A dragons wing, expanded to the sinister, org., ensigned 
with a cross of St. George. fc 



Digitized by Google 



3G6 



OFFICIAL AND CORPORATE HERALDRY. 



Supporters : Two dragons vert, their icings expanded arg., and 
each charged with a cross gu. 

MOITO : DOMINE, DlRIGE NOS. 

Examples: Brasses at Standon, a.d. 1477 ; Walthamstow, 
a.d. 1545; and Much Iladham, a.d. 1582: The Guildhall, 
London, &amp;c. 

Westminster ; Az., a portcullis or ; on a chief of the second, the 
arms of the Confessor blazoned on a pale, between two roses gu. No. 
607, PL XLVII. 

Canterbury : Arg., on a chevron gu., between three Cornish choughs 
ppr., a lion of England. 

York : Arg., on a cross of St. George, Jive lioncels of England, 
(See a Brass in St. Cross Church, York). The Great Seal 
of the City has this Seal between two Ostrich Feathers 
scrolled. 

Oxford : Per fesse arg. and harry wavy az. and of the first, an 
ox passant gu., armed and unguled or. Or thus, Arg., in base a 
ford of water ppr., through which an ox gu., armed and unguled or, 
is passing. 

Norwich : Qu., a castle triple towered org., and in base a lion of 
England. 

Bristol : Gu., a castle on a mount by the seaside, a ship under fuU 
sail passing by, all ppr. See the Brass to John Cutte, Mayor of 
Bristol, a.d. 1575, at Burnet, Somersetshire. 

Tho Crests, Supporters, and Mottoes, except in the instance 
of London, are omitted, and it must be understood that the 
examples blazoned are simply specimens of their several 
classes. 

The Fraternity of the Trinity House, London ; Incorporated 
by Henry VIII., a.d. 1515. 

Arms: Arg., a cross of St. George, between four ships of three 
masts under Jull sail, upon waves of the sea ppr., each bearing an 
ensign and pendant gu . 

Crest : A demi-lion rampt. guard, regally croumed or, holding in 



Digitized by Google 



OFFICIAL AND CORPORATE HERALDRY. 



3G7 



his dexter paw a sword erect gu. y hiked and pomelled or: No. 168, 
PL XIV. 

11. Commercial Companies and Guilds. 

These important Institutions, the sources from which the 
great stream of English Commerce has flowed onwards with 
ever-increasing strength, take us back to the grand heraldic 
era of King Edward EEL, by whom regular Armorial Bearings 
were assigned both to the Associations of Merchants, and to the 
Fraternities of Craftsmen and Traders. And these Coats of 
Arms of the Companies to which they belonged, were quartered* 
in many instances, with their Merchants' Marks, by enterprising 
individuals, a practice that was regarded with much jealousy by 
the Heralds, inasmuch as thus Merchants' Marks indirectly vin- 
dicated their claim to be regarded as a species of heraldic Bla- 
zonry, and Heraldry itself was constrained to extend its range 
beyond the exclusive limits of Chivalry. 

Many examples of tho Arms of the Early Companies or Guilds 
exist, particularly in Brasses, to which I refer the student. I 
proceed to blazon the arms of the more important of these insti- 
tutions. 

1. The Merchants of the Staple of Calais, incorporated by 
Edward III. : Barry undee of six org. and az., on a chief gu., a 
lion of England. Example: Standon, Herte, a.d. 1477. No. 304, 
PL XTII. 

2. The Merchants Adventurers, or Hamburgh Merchants, 
received their original Charter from Edward I. : Barry undee of 
six arg. and az., a chief quartered gu. and or ; in the 1st and 4th 
quarters a lion of England, and in the 2nd and 3rd quarters two 
Ijancastrian roses. Example : The Brass to John Tkrri, a.d. 1524, 
St. John's, Maddermarket, Norwich, which has tho arms of the 
Company quartered with the " Mark " of John Terri himself : 
No. 305, PI. XIII. 

3. The East India Merchants, incorporated by Queen Eliza- 



Digitized by Google 



308 



OFFICIAL AND CORPORATE HERALDRY. 



BETH : Az., three Ships under full mil on the sea ppr., their sails, 
ensigns, and pendants all charged with the cross of St. George ; on 
a chief arg., between two Lancastrian roses, a pale quarterly of the 
first and gu., bearing a flcur-de-lys of France and a lion of England. 
Example : The Brass to the Navigator, John Eldred, a.d. 1632, 
at Great Saxham, Suffolk. Upon this same Brass are the Arms 
of the Levant and Russia Merchants' Companies. 

4. The Levant, or Turkey Merchants : Az., beiween two rocks, 
a ship under full sail on the sea ppr., the sails, ensign, and pen- 
dants charged with (lie cross of St. George ; a chief engrailed or ; in 
base, a sea-horse. 

5. The Russia Merchants : Barry wavy of six org. and az. ; 
over all a ship under full sail ppr., the sails, dc, charged with 
the cross of St. George, all between three bezants; on a chief or 
between two Lancastrian roses, a pale gu., bearing a lion of 
England. 

6. TnE Merchants Adventurers of Bristol: Barry tcavy of 
eight org. and az., over all a bend or, charged with a dragon passant, 
with wings addorsed and tail extended, vert ; on a chief gu., between 
two bezants, a lion of England. 

The Arms of the Twelve Great London Companies or Guilds, 

* 

are as follow : 

1. The Mercers' Company, incorporated a.d. 1394: Gu., a 
demi virgin, couped below the shoidders, ppr., vested or, crowned 
with an eastern crown, her hair dishevelled, and wreathed about 
her temples with roses of the second, issuing from clouds, and all 
tcithin an orle of the same, ppr. Example: Higham Ferrers, 
Northants, a.d. 1504. 

2. The Grocers, (a.d. 1346) : Arg., a chevron gu., between nine 
cloves m. Example : Finchley, Middlesex, a.d. 1610. 

3. The Drapers, (a.d. 1332 and 1364; Arms 1439) : Az., three 
clouds, radiated, ppr., each adorned with a triple crown or, cap gu. 
Example: Walthamstow, Essex, a.d. 1543. 

4. The Fishmongers. (The Stock and Salt Fishmongers' ancient 



Digitized by Google 



OFFICIAL AND CORPORATE HERALDRY. 3G9 

Companies combined, and their separato Aims united on a single 
Shiold, a.d. 1534) : Az., three dolphins naiant, in pale, arg., finned 
and ducally crowned or, between two pairs of lucies in saltire, (the sin. 
surmounting the dexi.), over the nose of each lucy a ducal coronet gold : 
on a chief gu., three pairs of keys, endorsed in saltire, of the last. 
Example: Woburn, Bucks, a.d. 1520. 

5. The Goldsmiths, (a.d. 1327): Quarterly; 1 and 4 gu., a 
leoparoVs face or ; 2 a)id 3, az., a covered cup, and in chief two 
buckles, their tongues fesse-wise, points to the dext., all of the second. 
Example: Datchet, Bucks, a.d. 1593. 

6. The Merchant Tailors, (a.d. 1466 and 1503) : Arg., a royal 
tent, between two parliament robes, gu., lined erm., (lie tent garnished 
and the tent-staff and pennon all or ; on a chief az., a lion of England. 
Example : St. Martin Outwich, London, a.d. 1500. 

7. The Skinners, (a.d. 1327 and 1395): Erm., on a chief 
gu., three Prince's coronets, composed of crosses paiccs and fleurs dc lys, 
or, with caps of the first, and tasscUed of the last. Examplo : 
Skinners' Hall. 

8. The IIaberdashers, (a.d. 1447, Arms in 1571): Barry 
neb idee of six arg. and az., over all a bend gu., charged with a lion 
of England. Example : St. Andrew Undcrshaft, London, a.d. 
1571. 

9. The Salters, (a.d. 1364 and 1530, Arms in 1530): Per 
chev. az. and gu., three covered cuj&gt;s, or salt-sprinklers, arg. Example : 
All Hallows, Barking, London, c. 1535. 

10. The Ironmongers, (a.d. 1462): Arg., on a chevron gu., 
three swivels or, (the central one pale wise, the other two in the line of 
the ordinary,) between as many steel gads az. Example : Iron ■ 
mongers' Hall. 

11. The Vintners, (a.d. 1365 and 1437): Sa., a chevron between 
three tuns arg. Examplo : Vintners' Hall. 

12. The Clothworkers, (a.d. 1482 and 1528, Arms in 1530): 
Sa., a chevron erm., between two habicks in chief arg. y and a tezel 
slipped in base or. Example : Clothworkers' Hall. 

2 B 



Digitized by Google 



370 OFFICIAL ANT) CORPORATE HERALDRY. 

To these, as examples of the other Companies of London, 
I add the Blazon of three other Shields of the samo class. 

1. The Painters-Stainers, or Painters : Quarterly; 1 and 4, az., 
three shields, 2 and 1 , arg. ; 2 and 8, az., a chevron, between three 
phamix heads erased, or. Example : Fainters' Hall. 

2. The Stationers, (a.d. 1556): Az., on a chevron or, between 
three Bibles lying fesse-wise gu., garnished, leaved, and clasped gold, 
(clasps to the base), an eagle rising ppr., enclosed by two Lancastrian 
roses ; from the chief of the shield, a demi-circle of glory edged with 
clouds ppr., therein a Dove displayed, about its head a circle arg. 
Example : Brass to John Day, printer, a.d. 1564, Littlo Bradley, 
Suffolk. 

8. Tho Brewers : Gu., on a chevron arg., between three pairs of 
barley garbs, in saltire, or, three tuns sa., hooped of the third. Ex- 
ample : at All Hallows Barking, London, a.d. 1592. 

Arms were also granted, at the following periods, to several 
other Civic Companies ; as, to the Tallow Chandlers, a.d. 1456 ; 
to the Upholders, in 1465; to the Carpenters, in 1466; to the 
Wax-Chandlers, in 1484; to the Weavers, in 1490; to the 
Coopers, in 1509 ; to the Plasterers, in 1546 ; to the Armourers, 
in 1556 ; and to tho Apothecaries, in 1617. 

Shields of Arms are considered to belong to the different 
Counties of tho United Kingdom, and they are habitually used 
in documents and publications having a direct reference to the 
several Counties. It is difficult, however, to understand how a 
County can be supposed either to have a corporate existence, 
or to be able to bear arms. Accordingly, I do not include in 
this chapter the so-called Arms of the Counties— arms which 
appear to have been adapted from tho heraldic insignia of tho 
early Earls or Counts. 

In this Chapter, had I been enabled to have extended it as 
fully as I should have desired, I should have included a com- 
plete series of those arms of which I have given only a few 



Digitized by Google 



OFFICIAL AND CORPORATE HERALDRY. 



371 



selected examples ; and I should also havo added several other 
groups, that would have comprehended the heraldic insignia of 
tho Regiments of the British Army, of our various National 
and Public Institutions and Associations, and of the most im- 
portant of the incorporated Companies of our own times. 1 
cannot resist adding the Mottoes of the Royal Artillery and the 
Royal Marines — the former, with the Royal Anns and a gun, 
havo the words Ubique, and Quo Fas et Gloria Ducunt ; and, 
with a representation of tho terrestrial globe, the latter have 
these words — Per Mare, per Terras. 




No. 723. — Mrar.rLDABA Ni thoohhoy, of Bombay. 
Soe tho end of Chap. XXIX.) 



No. 556.— Crown of Hekby VII., King's College Chanel, Cambridge. 

fieo p. 319. 



CHAPTER XXII. 

ARCHITECTURAL HERALDRY. 

English Heraldry and the Gothic Architecture of England aroso 
and flourished togothor, From the first they acted in concert, 
and their allied action has always been productive of the hap- 
piest results. From the edifices that the Gothic of the middle 
ages has left, as its own most fitting memorial, we learn many 
of not the least valuable of our lessons in early Heraldry. And 
it is from a thoughtful study of the manner in which the old 
alliance between Heraldry and Gothic Architecture expressed 
itself in the Architectural Heraldry of the Plantagenot and 
Tudor eras, that we determino both the character and the range 
of our own Architectural Heraldry, in the revived Gothic Archi- 
tecture of the present day. 

Itself ossontially an historical Art, Architecture, through the 
agoncy of othor Arts working in close association with it, aspires 
to become a stone-inscribed History. Such co-operation neces- 
sarily implies that every historical accessory should be in con- 



Digitized by Google 



ARCHITECTURAL HERALDRY. 



373 



sistent harmony with the stylo of Architecture with which it 
would be associated. Classic Architecture, accordingly, requires 
that every historical allusion should be made through its own 
medium. Whatever Heraldry it may recognize, must bo a 
Heraldry that derives its imagery from classic sources, and em- 
bodies its symbolism in classic guise. Alike in sentiment, in 
feeling, and in expression, the historical element of Classic 
Architecture must be thoroughly classic, and consequently it is 
impossible that any edifices erected in this style should be ren- 
dered historical of England. At any rate, it is not possible to 
write English History upon a classic edifice, with a ^freo and a 
legible hand, or even in English characters, and in keeping with 
English traditions and associations. The style peremptorily 
refuses to concede to English History more than a paraphrase 
and a translation after the classic manner. 

On the other hand that Architectural Heraldry which re- 
cords English History with the most consistent and emphatic 
expressiveness, is an element of Gothic Architecture. Without 
it tho style is imperfect. It carries out its ideas. It is the 
inexhaustible source of its happiest decorations. By it the 
Gothic realizes the peculiarly historical attributes of its own 
character. And, as the style is itself of universal applicability, 
free in action, and elastic in the development of its principles — 
so also Heraldry provides for the Gothic Architect, (and par- 
ticularly when employed upon public and national works,) tho 
most comprehensive and the most plastic of symbolism. Such 
being tho case, it is a matter for equal surpriso and regret that 
Architectural Heraldry should hitherto have been so gonerally 
neglected, even by some of our Gothic Architects. It is to be 
hoped that tho time at length has come, in which both Archi- 
tects themselves, and all who feel a real interest in their great 
Art, will bestow at least a portion of their regard upon Heraldry 
in its special relation to Architecture. From mediaeval Heraldry 
they will find that the Heraldry, which it is for them to intro- 



Digitized by Google 



374 



ARCHITECTURAL HERALDRY. 



duco and to incorporate into their Gothic Architecture, must be 
derived. But here, as in the instance of the Architecture itself, 
it is not a blind following, and much loss is it a mere inanimate 
reproduction of mediaeval Heraldry, and a reiteration of its forms 
and usages, that will enable our Architects to render their 
Architecture historical through a Heraldry of its own. What 
they have to do is to study the old Heraldry, to familiarise them- 
selves with its working, to read its records with ease and fluency, 
and to investigate the principles upon which it was carried out 
into action. And having thus become Heralds through having 
attained to a mastery over mediaeval Heraldry, our Architects 
will devote themselves to the development of a fresh application 
of Heraldry in their own Architecture. The mediaeval autho- 
rities will have taught our Architects both what Heraldry is 
able to accomplish, and the right system for its operation ; and 
then with themselves will rest the obligation to produce a 
Heraldry that shall be truly their own, and to associate it with 
the Gothic Architecture of to-day. 

In their treatment of heraldic devices and compositions, I 
assume that our Architects would avoid every early convention- 
alism, which could detract from the artistic excellence of their 
works. Good drawing and truthful expression are in perfect 
keeping with the best and purest Heraldry, as an absolute 
harmony necessarily exists between the noblest of Architecture 
and of Sculpture and Painting. What I venture to designate 
an archaic system of rendering their figures, certainly does not 
vitiate the Heraldry of the early Heralds: but then their 
Heraldry would have been equally good, had their figures been 
faultless as works of Art. And though we may produce good 
Heraldry without good Art, still our Heraldry will never lose 
anything through an alliance with the most perfect Art; and 
in the instance of our Architectural Heraldry, the very highest 
artistic merit is a positive condition of excellence. I am aware 
that there exist individual** prepared to maintain that good 



Digitized by Google 



ARCHITECTURAL HERALDRY. 



375 



Heraldry implies bad Art. To such persons I cannot concede 
any authority to pronounce an opinion even upon good Heraldry ; 
but, in illustration of my own sentiments,' I refer them to the 
Supporters of the Royal Shield of England, as they appear at 
the entrance to Buckingham Palace ; and I ask whether in their 
opinion that Lion and that Unicorn would discharge their 
heraldic duties with less complete heraldic efficiency, had they 
been sculptured after drawings by Sir Edwin Landseer, (sup- 
posing that great artist sometimes to be in an heraldic mood,) 
instead of being such outrageous burlesques upon both Art and 
Heraldry as have been permitted to intrude themselves under 
the very eyes of their Sovereign ? 

It is a singular circumstance, the causes of which it is by no 
means necessary now to investigate, that Heraldry is invariably 
felt to be one of the most interesting of studies by those who 
have bestowed some thought upon it, while by almost all who 
are absolutely unacquainted with it it is held to be dry and 
uninviting, if not actually repulsive Whatever the feeling 
generally entertained for them, the peculiar value of heraldic 
devices for purposes of decoration in Gothic Architecture, and 
their happy facility for adaptation to almost every possible 
condition, may justly claim for Architectural Heraldry the 
studious, and therefore the cordial regard of every Gothic 
Architect. Without Heraldry, historical sculpturo in Architec- 
ture must ever act at disadvantage. The two in union enable 
the Architect to work with full powers. For Heraldry comes 
in readily on innumerable occasions when sculpture, properly so 
called, would be inadmissible. It enriches subordinate archi- 
tectural details with characteristic decoration, by the very 
process which gives to them a meaning ; and thus it inscribes 
those details with an historical record. In the more important 
members of an edifice, also, Heraldry is equally ready to exert 
faculties fully adequate to all fhat they can require. If it be 
desired to identify an architectural work with a single person or 



Digitized by Google 



370 



ARCHITECTURAL HERALDRY. 



with a particular family, Heraldry knows well Low to symbolize 
with distinctness and precision the solitary impersonation, or 
the kindred group. Or should the edifice bo one directly con- 
nected with the nation, either in some department of the 
Government, or in the administration of some far-off colony or 
dependency — Heraldry here is not found wanting; but, in 
union with sculpture, it carries around the entire building its 
historical series of much-conveying symbols; and from base- 
ment to parapet the Architecture is eloquent of the men who 
have taken a part in rendering their country the great and 
honoured England that she is. 

Amongst the practical lessons that Architects will learn from 
the oarly Heralds, when they worked with the Architects of 
their own day, are those that will impress upon their minds the 
rule that shields and niches are never to be introduced into 
architectural compositions for their own sake alone, but that 
every shield is to be chargod with its proper bearings, and 
every niche is to contain a becoming statue. They will also 
learn that heraldic insignia are always to be introduced with a 
definite purpose ; that each class of devices has certain functions 
peculiar to itself, and that the skilful architectural Herald 
will always be able to adapt the devices and compositions of 
Heraldry to every condition and circumstance of oach particular 
edifice. In the accessories of buildings also, as well as in their 
structural decorations, Heraldry is ever ready to provide the 
most felicitous of ornamentation. In Stained Glass, heraldic 
designs, and the heraldio treatment of all designs are of the 
utmost value and tho greatest interest. In Tilo Pavements, 
Heraldry is equally efficient. The Heraldry of the early tiles 
at Malvern, Gloucester, Worcester, Westminster, and many 
other places, abounds alike in historical information, and in 
practical suggestions. And again, the engraven and inlaid 
stone pavements that have jusf been revived by Clayton and 
Bell with such happy effect, may derive from Heraldry an 



Digitized by Google 



ARCHITECTURAL HERALDRY. 



377 



infinite series of always appropriate and graphic dosigns. Archi- 
tectural Wood-carvers, in like manner, will find similar advan- 
tages in a close alliance with Heraldry. It is the same with 
architectural Metal-workers, and with every artist and crafts- 
man that the Architect summons to work with him in tho 
realization of his compositions : Architectural Ileraldry abounds 
with direct teaching and indirect suggestions available alike by 
them all. 

Throughout the Gothic era, tho custom" prevailed to intro- 
duce shields of arms of the Sovereign and tho several members 
of his family into tho architectural decorations of the more 
important edifices, and in many instances also tho armorial 
insignia of benefactors and persons of eminence at the time 
in the realm. Some relics of this usage remain in all our 
cathedrals, and in almost every early building that still exists. 
The shields were generally placed in tho spandrels of somo of 
tho arcades and arches, in bosses of the vaulting or of the 
timber roofs, or in the stained glass of tho windows; some- 
times thoy occur below niches, as on the altar-screen at St. 
Alban's ; and in other instances in various other positions. 

Amongst the most interesting and valuable of tho collections 
of early Architectural Ileraldry to which I am able to direct 
tho attention of tho student, are those in the Cathedrals, and 
especially in tho Cloisters of Canterbury Cathedral, in West- 
minster Abbey and Hall, St. Alban's Abbey, Kino's College 
Chapel, Cambridge, and Sr. George's Chapel, Windsor, and also 
many of the Collegiate Buildings at both Oxford and Cam- 
bridge ; and with then} I may associate, as examples of parish 
ehurchos rich in Heraldry, tho churches of Great Yarmouth and 
Fothekinghay. 

The Architectural Heraldry of Westminster Abbey commences 
with the series of shields that were eculptured by Edward I., or 
perhaps by Henry III., in tho spandrels of the wall arcades of 
tho choir aisles. These noble shields havo suffered grievously 



Digitized by Google 



378 ARCHITECTURAL HERALDRY. 

from the barbarous mutilations that, from time to timo, have 
been permitted to outrage the Church, which stands at the head 
of the ecclesiastical edifices of England. Of the original series 
there still remain, on the south side, the shields of the Confessor, 
Provence, Winchester (De Quincy), Lincoln (De Lacy), Corn- 
wall and Essex (Fitz Piers) ; and on tho north side, those of 
the Emperor, France, Gloucester (De Clare), Kent (De Burgh), 
De Montfort, and De Warrenne. More towards the west, in 
Henry V.'s work, there are remains of some other shiolds 
that are painted (and not sculptured in relief) in the aisle- 
arcades of that portion of the Abbey. There is also a fine early 
shield of tho Confessor in the south-west window. Of the rest of 
the Architectural Heraldry of Westminster Abbey, it will be 
sufficient for me to specify the Badges of Henry V. in his monu- 
ment ; the Stall-Plates of the Knights and Esquires of the Bath 
in Henry VII.'s Chapel, and various Royal Badges scattered in 
rich profusion throughout both the exterior and the interior of 
that chapel, together with two fine shields of France Modern and 
England, one without, and the other with a Label, carved beneath 
the dark vaulting that covers the approach to it In West- 
minster Hall, in addition to the remarkable series of Royal 
Crests and Badges, and to the fine Shields at the entrance, shields 
charged with the arms of Richard II. and of the Confessor alter- 
nate upon tho corbels, that carry the principal trusses of the 
noble roof. The Royal Slueld of Henry VII. with its Supporters, 
and the Crown, and also with the Badges of that Prince, are 
sculptured at King's Chapel in a truly splendid style, notwith- 
standing the decided decline of heraldic ^rt that prevails during 
the period of the Tudors : and tho entrance gateway to St. John's 
College in the same University, displays another admirable 
example of Tudor Architectural Heraldry. In concluding this 
chapter, I again refer students to that treasury of historical 
Heraldry, tho collection of Stall-Plates of the Garter at 
Windsor: and 1 must suggest a visit to tho chantries of Abbots 



Digitized by Google 



ARCHITECTURAL HERALDRY. 



379 



Wheathamstede and Ramrydge in St. Alban's Abbey, to stu- 
dents who would desire to see with their own eyes how admi- 
rably the Heralds and the Architects of the olden time worked 
together. The remains of the gate-house also of Kirkham 
Priory in Yorkshire, and the architectural monument of Bishop 
Hadfield at Durham, must be added to the series of structures 
that are specially rich in the Heraldry of Gothic Architecture 
before its fall. 




No. 657.— Shield of Effigy of a Knight of the timo of Edward II., at 
Clehongre, Herefordshire. See Chapter XXX. 



Digitized by Google 



No. 557.— Crown from the Monument of Margaret, Countess of Richmond, 
a.d. 1509, Westminster Abbey. See pp. 318 and 392. 



CHAPTER XXIII. 

MONUMENTAL HERALDRY. 

As a general rule, the Monuments of the middle ages are 
appropriate, characteristic, and deeply interesting, both as works 
of Art, and as commemorative memorials. In the degree also 
that theso early monuments increase in their importance, in that 
same degreo do they claim an increased measure of admiring 
approval. On the other hand, in our modern monuments the 
converse of this rule obtains ; and particularly in the circum- 
stance that the more important the monument, tho more de- 
plorably unworthy it is almost certain to be. The earlier and 
tho more recent monuments in Westminster Abbey exemplify 
tho two eras in a significant manner. The competitions that 
within tho last fow years have brought together collections of 
designs for certain public memorials, have been no less conclu- 
sive in demonstrating the fact, that the nobler the required 
monument, the more ignoble is the prevailing character of tho 
compositions that are submitted for it. The evidence of the 
Abbey and of tho competitions is corroborated in evory direc- 
tion by the innumerable objects that act as monuments in our 



Digitized by Google 



MONUMENTAL HKRALDRY. 



381 



cemeteries, and by their contemporaries, the marble pyramids, 
and mural tablets, and tall white monotonous slabs of our 
churches and churchyards. 

Upon consideration, the early monuments aro found to be 
thoroughly heraldic, while it is ovident that Heraldry knows 
nothing of those that so clearly indicate tho lapse of intervening 
centuries. I believe that to this presence of Monumental 
Heraldry with the memorials of the one era, and to its absence 
from those of the other, may be attributed the painful contrast 
that oxists between them ; and I am persuaded that true 
Monumental Heraldry alone is competent to render the com- 
memorative memorials of our own times worthy to take rank 
with such monuments, as our predecessors of the thirteenth and 
fourteenth centuries were in the habit of erecting. It must be 
added that, as a matter of course, a preliminary step to tho 
adoption of a gonuino and really effective Monumental Heraldry 
must bo tho absolute exclusion of tho pagan element from our 
Monuments — the exclusion of all mythological allegories and 
emblems, from inverted torches to the semi -nude figures whoso 
identity has to be determined by their names being inscribed 
beneath their feet. 

The study of Monumental and of Architectural Heraldry may 
be most advantageously pursued together. Indeed, tho one 
study may bo said to imply tho other ; so that what has been 
said in the preceding chapter upon Architectural Heraldry, is 
equally applicable to tho Heraldry of Monuments. Tho old 
monuments are to bo studied as authorities for their Horaldry ; 
but they are not to be copied, neither is their Heraldry to bo 
reproduced once more in facsimile. There is much, for ex- 
ample, that tho modern designer of engraven monumental slabs 
may learn from tho Brasses of tho reign of Richard II. ; and 
yet who can forbear to smile when ho finds a figure of a knight, 
armed and appointed as Boling broke and Mowbray were when 
they met for their famous combat, laid down in tho year 1861, 



382 



MONUMENTAL HERALDRY. 



to commemorate a veteran officer, who had for some time been 
a metropolitan member of Parliament since the passing of the 
Koform Bill? This is a companion work to the Dr. Johnson in 
a Roman toga. 

Very small is the number of the early monuments that are 
altogether unable to repay the inquiries of the student of 
Heraldry, while fine and eminently instructive examples exist 
in very considerable numbers. The cathedrals and both the 
greater and lesser churches are alike celebrated for their ad- 
mirable monuments. None surpass those of Edmund of Lan- 
caster and his Countess, of the De Valences, of Auanore of 
Castile, of John of Eltham, and of Edward III. and his Queen 
Philippa, in Westminster Abbey. The monuments also of the 
Black Prince, of LTenry IV. and his Queen Joanna, and of 
Archbishop Arundel, at Canterbury; of the Beauchamps, at 
Warwick ; of the Nevilles, at Staindrop ; of Bishop Burghersh 
and his brother, at Lincoln ; of Edward II., at Gloucester ; of 
the Countess of Richmond and her son, Henry VII., at West- 
minster ; of the two Abbots and Duke Humphrey Plantaoenet, 
at St. Alban's, and of Prince Arthur Tudor, at Worcester, are 
inferior to none in heraldic interest. From a long series of 
other examples, which invite the special attention of the student 
of Monumental Heraldry, I may specify those that are at 
Beverley, Tewkesbury, St. Alban's, Christchurch, Arundel, Win- 
cholsea, Trotton in Sussex, Elsyng in Norfolk, and Cobham in 
Kent. 

Whatsoever especial points the student may desire to investi- 
gate, he will find examples that will place before him the 
information that he requires. The earliest known quartering 
of arms appears upon the monument of Alianore of Castile ; and 
very early quartering by a subject is shown in the shield of the 
Earl of Pembroke on the monument of his royal mother-in law, 
Queen PuiLirrA, and also upon the surcoat of the Earl himself 
in the Elsyng Brass, a.d. 1347. The shields of arms with 



Digitized by Google 



MONUMENTAL HERALDRY. 



383 



their accessories upon the Ranirydge monumental chantry at 
St. Albans, are exquisite examples of pure taste, exuberant 
fancy, and delicate treatment. The shields of the Percy Shrine 
at Beverley exemplify the most effective drawing, the boldest 
sculpture, and diapering equally simple and beautiful. The 
monument to a priest of the same family, also in Beverley 
Minster, illustrates in a remarkable manner tho usage of em- 
broidering a series of shields of arms upon ecclesiastical vest- 
ments. Tho effigy at Worcester, and tho Brass at Trotton, are 
examples of a similar application of shields of arms to the deco- 
ration of female costume. And, again, tho Heraldry of dress is 
shown in all its curious and sometimes fantastic varieties in 
almost innumerable brasses and sculptured effigies. A profusion 
of heraldic insignia adorns tho monument of Lurxmc Robsart, 
Lord Bourchier, Standard, Bearer of Henry V., at Westminster 
Abbey. On either side of this last monument two large banners 
are carved in stone, with quartered arms in relief, their staves 
forming mouldings of the canopy, and being held severally by a 
lion and a falcon, or perhaps an eagle. Other examples might 
be adduced in vast numbers of monuments of every class, 
the simplest as well as the most elaborate and costly, all 
of them competent to bear witness to the justice of the highest 
encomiums that may be bestowed upon early Monumental 
Heraldry. 

II. The Royal Monuments of England. 

At Fontevraud, in Normandy, there are original monumental 
effigies of Henry II., Alianore of Guienne, Richard I., and 
Is a belle of Angoul6me. 

At Rouen is a second monumental effigy of Richard I. 

At the Abbey of L'Espan, near Mans, is a monumental effigy 
of Berevgaria of Navarre. 

At Mans is a curious enamelled tablet, supposed to be monu- 
mental, to Geoffrey of Anjou, the Founder of the House of 



Digitized by Google 



381 



MONUMENTAL HERALDRY. 



Plantagenet. Engraved by Stothard, and again in Labarte's 
Handbook. 

Tho following aro in England : — 

1. William RtfFUs, died 1100. Winchester Cathedral. Stone 
coffin. 

2. John, died 12 1G. Worcester Cathedral. Effigy and coffin- 
lid of the period of his death, now on an altar-tomb of about 
a.d. 1500. This is the earliest Royal Effigy in England. 

3. " Henry III., died 1272. Westminster Abbey. Tomb and 
Effigy, with mosaic work. 

4. Edward I., died 1307. Westminster Abbey. Tlain Tomb. 

5. Alianore of Castile, died 1290. Westminster Abbey. 
Tomb, Effigy, and Canopy. 

6. Edward II., died 1327. Gloucester Cathedral. Tomb, 
Effigy, and Canopy. 

7. Edward III., died 1377. Westminster Abbey. Tomb, 
Effigy, and Canopy. 

8. Thilippa of Hainault, died 13G9. Westminster Abbey. 
Tomb, Effigy, and Canopy. 

9 and 10. Richard II., deposed 1399 ; and Anne of Bohemia, 
died 1394. Westminster Abbey. Tomb, two Effigies, and 
Canopy. 

1 1 and 12. Henry IV., died 1413 ; and Joanna of Navarro, died 
1437. Canterbury Cathedral. Tomb, two Effigies, and Canopy. 

13. Henry V., died 1422. Westminster Abbey. Tomb and 
mutilated Effigy. 

14 and 15. Henry VII., died 1509; and Elizabeth of York, 
died 1503. Westminster Abbey. Tomb, two Effigies and En- 
closure. 

16. Elizabeth, died 1G03. Westminster Abbey. Renaissance 
Monument and Effigy. 

To the foregoing the following monuments of Royal Personages 
may be added : — 



Digitized by Google 



MONUMENTAL HERALDRY. 385 

1. William Longesi'ee, Earl of Salisbury, died 1226. Salisbury 
Cathedral. Tomb and Effigy. 

2. Edmond P lant ag en et, First Earl of Lancaster, (second son 
of Henry III.), died 1296. Westminster Abbey. Tomb, Effigy, 
and Canopy. 

3. Aveljne, Countess of Lancaster, died 1260. Westminster 
Abbey. Tomb, Effigy, and Canopy. 

4. William de Valence, Earl of Pembroke, (son of Isabelle 
of Angouleme), died 1296. Westminster Abbey. Tomb and 
Effigy, with rich Enamels. 

5. Aymer de Valence, Earl of Pembroke, (son of Earl Wil- 
liam), died about 1320. Westminster Abbey. Tomb, Effigy, 
and Canopy. 

6. John Plantagenet, of Eltham, Earl of Cornwall, (second 
son of Edward II.), died 1334. Wcstminstor Abbey. Tomb ami 
Effigy ; Canopy destroyed. 

7. William Plantagenet, of Ilatfiold, (second son of Edward 
III.), died about 1340. York Cathedral. Tomb and Effigy. 

8. Edward Plantagenet, K.G., the Black Prince, died 1376. 
Canterbury Cathedral. Tomb, Effigy and Canopy ; also a Shield, 
Helm, &amp;c. 

9. Alianore de Bohun, (widow of Thomas Plantagenet, Duke 
of Gloucester, youngest son of Edward III.), died 1399. West- 
minster Abbey. Tomb and Brass. 

10. Edmond Plantagenet, K.G., Duke of York, (fifth son of 
Edward III.), died 1402. King's Langlcy, Herts. Tomb and 
Shields of Arms. 

11. HUMPHREY Plantagenet, K.G.,Duko of Gloucester, (fourth 
son of Henry IV.), died 1447. St. Alban's Abbey. Architectural 
and Heraldic Monument. . 

12. Catherine, (third wife of Prince John Plantagenet of 
Ghent), died 1403. Lincoln Cathedral. Tomb, now despoiled 
of its Brasses. 

13. Isabelle Plantagenef, (only daughter of fiichard Plan- 

2 c 



Digitized by Google 



386 



MONUMENTAL HERALDRY. 



tagenet, of Coningsbnrgh), and hor husband, Hknry Bourchier, 
K.G., Earl of Essex and Eu, died 1400. Little Easton, Essex. 
Brass with two Effigies. 

14. Elizabeth Plantagenet, (sister of Edward IV.), and her 
husband, John r&gt;E la Pole, K.G., Duke of Suffolk, died, 1400. 
Wingfield, Suffolk. Tomb, with two Effigies. 

15. Arthur Tudor, K.G., Prince of Wales, (eldest son of 
Henry VII.), died 1502. Worcester Cathedral. Architectural 
and Heraldic Monument. 

16. Margaret Douglas, Countess of Lennox, (mother of Lord 
Darnley, and grand-daughter of Henry VII.), died 1577. West- 
minster Abbey. Tomb and Effigy. 

17. Margaret Beaufort, Countess of Richmond, (mother of 
Henry VII.), died 1509. Westminster Abbey. Tomb and 
Effigy. 

18. Margaret Plantagenet, Countess of Salisbury, (daughter 
of George Tlantagenet, Duke of Clarence), died 1541. Christ 
Church, Hampshire. Architectural Monument. 

19. Mary Stuart, Queen of Scots, died 1587. Westminster 
Abbey. Renaissance Monument and Effigy. 

Amongst the Crystal Palace Collections there are casts of all 
the Royal effigies, including those at Fontevraud, Rouen and 
Mans, except the mutilated No. 13 of the former of the fore- 
going lists; and also casts of Nos. 1, 6, 8, 17, and 19, in the 
second list. 

The early usage of placing various shields of arms upon monu- 
ments leads naturally to inquiries into the rules, if any ever 
existed, by which tho selection of suoh shields might have been 
determined. So far as my own observation has extended, I have 
not yet been able to detect any rulo that was generally recognized 
upon this subject, except the simple and obvious one of placing 
about a monument the shields of the persons who were nearest 



Digitized by Google 



MONUMENTAL HERALDRY. 



387 



of kin to tho individual commemorated. In the monuments of 
Royal personages, considerations of slate policy might often 
influence this selection ; and it is evident that the propriety of 
placing about certain other monuments the shields of the Sove- 
reign and of the Princes of the blood royal, was regarded as 
beyond all question. The monuments of Bishop Burghersh 
and his brother at Lincoln exemplify this practice ; as do the 
Brasses to Archbishop De Waldeby at Westminster, to Sir 
Symon de Felbryge, K.G., to Canon Sleford at Balsham, and to 
Thomas Leventhorpe at Sawbridge worth. When statuettes, or 
44 weepers," as they wore called, were placed about monuments 
in niches or beneath canopies, tho shields associated with the 
figures would naturally be identified with the personages repre- 
sented. This is the case in the Beauchamp Monument at 
Warwick ; and, so far as there exist remains of the original 
memorials, it is the same in the two fine monuments of King 
Edward HX and his Queen Philippa, in Westminster Abbey. 
The statuettes and shields upon the magnificent monument of 
Edmond of Lancaster and Aymer de Valence now are by no 
means easily identified ; but they are second to none in either 
artistic excellence or heraldic interest. In very many instances 
the arms were originally blazoned in colour only, without any 
carving in relief, or any incised outlines; and in such shields 
the blazon is commonly lost, or perhaps it has been repainted, 
and so all traces of the original Heraldry in all probability have 
been destroyed. 

It was customary to repeat the same shield, or tho same group 
of shields, upon early monuments ; and it is found that precc- 
donco in arrangement was secured for the most important shield, 
which same shield was sometimes the only one in a series that 
was repeated; an example occurs in the monument to Earl 
William de Valence, where tho shield of England is the one 
that has precedence and is repeated. Upon the Monument of 
Alianore of Castile, the shields of England, Castile and Leon, and 

2 c 2 



388 



MONUMENTAL HERALDRY. 



Ponlhieu, (her husband, her father, and her mother,) alternate, 
and all aro repeated. And again, npon the basement of the 
monument of Edward III., a shield of France Ancient and England 
is repeated, alternating with one now charged with the red cross 
upon a golden field ; and, in like manner, his shields of arms 
44 for war and for peace " in alternation surround the monument 
of the Black Prince. See p. 250. 

Without attempting any further to suggest what usages may 
have been recognized and adopted in the arranging and placing 
of heraldic insignia upon mediaeval monuments, I will now 
briefly describe the arrangement of the shields that are still in 
existence upon a few remarkable early examples. 

The monument to King Edward III. Upon the south side, 
each placed beneath a bronze statuette, and all fixed to the body 
of tho monument itself, thero remain four shields enamellod 
upon copper in their proper blazonry ; two other shields are 
lost from the series, but the group of six statuottes is complete. 

1. France Ancient and England, with a silver label of three points. 

2. Castile and Leon impaling France Ancient and England. 3. 
France Ancient and England, with the Label represented in fac- 
simile in No. 489, PL XXXI. 4. Lost, (the statuette represents 
a bearded man). 5. Brittany, (ermine), impaling France Ancient 
and England. 6. Lost, (the statuette a youth). The shields yet 
existing are for the Black Prince, the Princesses Joan and Mary, 
and apparently for Edmond, the first Duke of York. As I havo 
already stated, upon tho basemont of this monument thero aro 
two large enamelled shields of France Ancient and England, and 
two others bearing, or, a cross gu. ; probably these last were 
originally shields of St. George. 

The Brass to Sir Hugh Hastings, a.d. 1347, Elsyng, Norfolk. 
Tho principal effigy has both a surcoat and a shield of Hastings, 
the mauncho being beautifully diapered, with a labol of threo 
points. The shafts of the canopy are formed of eight compart- 
ments, each of them having a canopied effigy, or " weeper ;" 



Digitized by Google 



MONUMENTAL HERALDRY. 389 

these figures, of which three are now lost, have their armorial 
insignia upon their surcoats. The figures that remain represent 
Edward III., Henry, Earl of Lancaster, No. 488 a, PL LXIII. ; 
Thomas Beauchamp, Earl of Warwick; Ralph, Lord Stafford; 
and Lord St. Amand : tho effigies that are lost are those of Law- 
rence Hastings, Earl of Pembroke, No. 338, PI. XXI; a Le 
Despencer ; and Roger, Lord Grey of Ruthyn. In the central 
spandrel of the canopy is a mounted St. George, his shield 
(No. 311, PI. XXIX.) and eurcoat and the barding of his charger 
being charged with his cross ; and above all are tho helm, mant- 
ling and crest of Sir Hugh Hastings. Tho entire remains of 
this fino Brass have just been engraved by Mr. Utting for tho 
Norfolk Archaeological Society. 

The Brass to Alianore de Bohun, Duchess of Gloucester, a.d. 
1399, Westminster Abbey. Six shields of arms, suspended from 
the shafts of tho canopy. On tho dexter sido : 1. Her husband, 
Thomas Plantagenet, Duke of Gloucester ; 2. Her father, Hum- 
phrey de BonuN, last Earl of Hereford ; 3. Milo of Hereford. 
On the sinister side: 1. Her. husband, impaling De Bohun and 
Milo, quarterly ; 2. De BonuN impaling Fitz-Alan and War- 
renne, quarterly : tho third shield on this side is lost. In the 
central spandrel of the canopy, the Swan Badge of the De Bohuns. 
Seo PI. XX., and No. 511, p. 254. 

Tho Brass to Joice, Lady Tiptoft, a.d. 1446, Enfield Church. 
Middlesex. There are six shields in this Brass, and they aro 
arranged precisoly in tho same mannor as in tho last example, 
tho Do Bohun Brass. On the dexter side : 1 . Her father, Edward 
Charlton, Baron Charlton de Powys ; 2. nor husband, Sir John 
Tiptoft, impaling tho impaled shield of her father and mother, 
in which impalement her mother's arms appear to the dexter : 
she was Alianore, daughter of Thomas Holland, Earl of Kent, 
and widow of Roger Mortimer, fourth Earl of March, and pre- 
cedence was evidently given to her arms in the marshalling of 
this shield in consideration of her exalted rank ; 3. Tiptoft, her 



Digitized by Google 



390 



MONUMENTAL HERALDRY 



husband. On the sinister side : 1. Tiptoft impaling Powys, her 
husband and herself; 2. Powys and Holland quarterly, her 
father and mother; 3. Powys, her father and herself. See PI. 
XVII., and No. 364 a, PI. XXIII. 

Edmond Plantagenet, K.G., Duke of York, a.d. 1402, at 
King's Langley, Herts. An elaborate altar-tomb, supporting a 
massive plain slab of black marble, which evidently does not 
belong to the monument. On the destruction of the monastic 
church at Langley, this tomb was placed in itfl present position 
in the north-east angle of the parish church. 

The monument is panelled, and in each foliated panel is a 
shield of arms carved in relief upon the alabaster. At the 
head are, St. Edmond, France ancient and England, and Edward 
the Confessor. At tho feet the only remaining shield is Hol- 
land of Kent, the borduro plain. On tho north side, com- 
mencing from tho west end, Leon, (a lion rampant) and Holland 
of Exeter, the bordure semee de lya. On tho south side, com- 
mencing from the west end, the Emperor, the eagle having two 
heads, but not crowned; then two shields of France ancient 
and England, each with a Label of three points; then the same 
impaling Castile and Leon ; again, France ancient and Eng- 
land, with a Label of three points; and tho same shield, without 
any Label, but within a bordure ; and the series is completed 
with the same quartered shield, with a Label of five points of 
Lancaster and France. The charges on the other Labels are no 
longer to be distinguished ; all that may be certainly affirmed is 
that, with the exception of tho second shield of the series, theso 
Labels have all borne charges. See Nos. 477 a, PI. XLV., 486, 
p. 253, and 678 a, Chap. XXXII. 

The Brass to Sir Simon de Felbryge, K.G., a.d. 1416. Two 
achievements of arms are lost. There remain, the Banner of 
Richard II., No. 627, PI. XXXV. ; the same arms blazoned 
upon a shield; the same arms impaling those of Anne of 
Bohemia ; and Felbryge, (or, a lion rampt. gu.) t impaling Teschen, 



Digitized by Google 



MONUMENTAL HERALDRY. 



391 



(a German coat, arg., an eagle displayed m.) : also on two shields 
a fetterlock. 

The cresting of the monument of ITenry IV. and his Queen at 
Canterbury, formed of delicately-carved Tudor flowers, originally 
had a small shield of Arms blazoned in colour between each pair 
of the flowers ; of these shields 16, with two half-shields at the 
extremities, yet remain on the south side ; from which side 18 
other shields have been lost. On the north sido 1 0 shiolds only, 
with one half-shield remain, and 24 arc lost : and all are lost at 
the head and the foot of the monument. Figures of angels also 
once held larger shields, one at each angle, and one in the 
centre of each side : of this series one mutilated shield only, 
that of Scotland, yet remains. The flat canopy itself which 
covers the effigies has evidently been twico painted, the decora- 
tion in both paintings having been heraldic. I commend this 
very interesting monument to the careful consideration of stu- 
dents of Historical Heraldry : and, at the same time, I am 
unable to resist a suggestion, which I would gladly have reach 
those who are in high authority, to the effect that this Royal 
monument, like its fellows at Westminster, is not quite in such 
a condition as will bo satisfactory to those who know the value 
of our national historical monuments of the highest rank. Let 
no one presume to " restore " these precious relics of departed 
centuries, since " restoration " and M destruction " are in reality 
interchangeable terms : but, without any destructive restoring, 
our Royal (and other national) monuments might be kept with 
reverent and vigilant care, and they might be empowered to 
proclaim, even to casual observers, that their worth is under- 
stood by those who, beyond all others, are bound to understand 
and to appreciate it 

Margaret Beaufort, Countess of Richmond, a.d. 1509, West- 
minster Abbey. An altar-tomb in the early Renaissance style, 
with an effigy, the work of Torregiano. The Heraldry is sin 
gularly interesting, and the whole is boldly executed in relief in 



Digitized by Google 



892 



MONUMENTAL HERALDRY. 



bronze. At the head, Edmond Tudor impaling Beaufort, her 
first husband and herself, the shield surmounted by a crown not 
arched. On the south side : 1. Her son and his consort, Henry 
VII. and Elizabeth of York ; the shield ensigned with an arched 
crown ; 2. Her husband's mothor, and hor first husband, Henry 
V., and Katharine of France, the crown arched ; 3. Her grandson, 
Arthur Plantaqenet, Prince of Wales, the crown not arched. On 
the north side : 1. The shield lost, but the arched crown remains ; 
2. Her father and mother, John Beaufort, K.G., Duke of Somerset, 
and Margaret Beauchamp of Bletsho, the crown not arched ; 3. 
Her paternal grandfather and grandmother, John Beaufort, 
K.G., (son of John Plantagenet of Ghent), and Margaret Hol- 
land; this shield is without any coronet. At the feet, her 
third husband and herself, Stanley impaling Beaufort, without 
any coronet. In this shield, Stanley is quarterly, 1 and 4 grand 
quarters, Stanley, Latham, and Warrcnne, quarterly ; 2 and 3, Isle 
of Man ; in pretence, MontauU. See Plates XXII. and XXXII., 
and No. 557, p. 380. 

The monument orocted by J ames I. to tho memory of Queen 
Elizabeth, in Westminster Abbey, is in itself a complete chapter 
of Koyal Heraldry, as such a chapter would be written by tho 
Heralds of the first Stuart who wore tho crown of Great Britain. 
About the cornice of the architectural canopy of tho monumont 
is placed a series of thirty-two shields, the shields themselves 
being carved in relief, but their charges are blazoned in gold 
and colours only on flat surfaces ; and as some, if not all of those 
shields havo been painted again at no distant period, there is 
consequently a degree of uncertainty as to their exact fidelity. 
As they now appear these shields, with two exceptions, are 
severally charged with two impaled coats of arms, and they are 
arranged in the order following. 1. The Confessor : 2. William I., 
England (two lions), and Flanders: 3. Henry L, England and 
Scotland : 4. Geoffrey Plantagenet, Anjou and England : 5. 
Henry II., England and Aqnitaine : &lt;». John, England, (three 



Digitized by Google 



MONUMENTAL HERALDRY. 



393 



lions), and AngouUme % (lozengy or, and gu) : 7. Henry III., Eng- 
land and Provence : 8. Edward I., England, and Castile and Leon : 
9. Edward II., England and France Ancient: 10. Edward III., 
France Ancient and Hainault : 11. Lionel, Duke of Clarence, 
(label with three cantons), and Be Burgh : 12. Mortimer and Cla- 
rence: 13. Mortimer and Holland, (plain bordure) : 14. Edmond, 
Duke of York, { laid with nine torteaux), and Castile and Leon : 15. 
Richard Plant aoenet, " of Coningsburgh," (bordure of Leon), and 
Mortimer and Be Burgh quarterly : 1G. Richard, Duke of York, 
(label with nine torteaux), and Neville: 17. Edward IV., France 
Modern and England, and Widville: 18. Henry VII. and Eliza- 
beth of York: 19. Henry VIII. and Anne Boleyn: 20. John 
Plantaoenet "of Ghent," (label, with nine ermine spots): 21. John 
"of Ghent" and Boeit—(gu., three Catherine wheels or): 22. 
Beaufort and Holland : 23. Beaufort and Bcauchamp : 24. Edmond 
Tudor, and Margaret Beaufort: 25, 26, 27, three impaled 
shields of Boleyn : 28, 29, two impaled shields of Howard ; the 
bend is plain, but the Scottish shield was probably painted out 
when the last re-blazoning took place : 30. Douglas of Angus, 
and Margaret Tudor : 31. Stuart of Lennox and Margaret 
Douglas, (the father and mother of Lord Darnley) : 32. Henry 
Stuart, Lord Darnley, and Mary Stuart, Queen of Scotland. 

Upon the canopy, at its four angles, four small shields, held 
by two dragons and two crowned lions, are charged with a rose, 
a flew de lys, a portcullis, and a harp, all crowned. On the 
basement are four other shields severally bearing, az., tltree 
garbs or, (Chester :) az, a harp or, stringed org., (Ireland) : sable, 
ten bezants in pile, (Cornwall) : and Wales. Also, on either side 
of the canopy there is an achievement of arms; that to the 
south has France Modern and England upon a large shield, with a 
golden lion and dragon as supporters, and the motto, Dieu. et. 
mon. droit, but without any crown ; and on the north side, upon 
another large shield, Scotland impaling France Modern and Eng- 
land, with a unicorn and lion crowned as supporters, the arms of 



Digitized by Google 



394 



MONUMENTAL HERALDRY. 



Scotland and the unicorn being on the dexter side ; the motto is 
King James's own, 11 Beati Pacific!." There is no crown above 
the shield. 

The monument of Ludovic Robsart, E.G., Lord Bourchiek, 
Standard-Bearer to Henry V., at Westminster, has shields 
surrounded with the Garter of the Order. Several slabs, now 
despoiled of their Brasses, in Winchester Cathedral, to Prelates 
of the order, show traces of having once been enriched with 
gartered shields of arms. And in Lincoln Cathedral, upon the 
monument of Catherine, the last wife of John Plantagenet 
of Ghent, the shields of arms were originally surrounded with 
the collar of SS. 

The use of Badges in the heraldic decoration of monuments 
is exemplified at Westminster in the sculptured figures in the 
chantry of Henry V. : and again, upon the slab that covers 
the tomb of Sir Humphrey Bourchier, a.d. 1471, which bears 
four richly-quartered shields with labols, and six Bourchier-knots, 
each one of them surmounting a piece of armour for guarding 
the elbow, No. 695, p. 285; these knots are formed of straps, 
one of them distinguished from the other by being studded, and 
both ending in buckles ; the slab also, which still retains the 
brass effigies of Henry Bourchier, Earl of Essex, and Isabella 
his Countess, at Little Easton, was originally powdered with 
Bourchier-Jcnots and fetterlocks. In Brasses at Tong, Salop, an 
elephant appears as a Badge, and an elephant and castle at Wiven- 
hoe in Essex ; the Beauchamp bear is introduced into the Brass 
of the Earl of Warwick ; a slab at Biggleswade is semee of cres- 
cents and escallops ; at Digswell, Herts, Lady Perient has her 
swan Badge embroidered upon her collar ; and at Burnhamthorpe, 
in Norfolk, in the spandrels of the canopy of the Brass to Sir 
William Calthorpe, is the Knight's Badge, a hawk belled and 
jessed, on a mount, having a scroll in his beak with the motto, 
Penser de fyner. 

Examples of arms emblazoned on Lozenges occur in the nionu- 



Digitized by Google 



MONUMENTAL HERALDRY. 



395 



ments to Margaret Douglas, Countess of Lennox, a.d, 1577 ; to 
the Duchess of Suffolk, a.d. 1563 ; and to Mary Stuart, the 
infant daughter of James L, all of them in Westminster Abbey. 

There is another class of early monuments of a simple 
character, which will always bo regarded with much interest 
by the Herald. I refer to the monumental slabs, either incised 
or sculptured in relief, that bear certain significant symbols to 
denote the rank, profession, or occupation of the persons com- 
memorated. In almost every instance, the Christian symbol, 
the Cross, appears with the other devices, and occasionally there 
is also a shield of arms. Memorials of this description aro 
charged with the mitre, stafF, chalice, and book of ecclesiastics ; 
with the warrior's sword, and the pilgrim's stafF ; with keys, 
bows and arrows, axes, ships, fish, penners and ink-horns, 
trumpets, implements for bell-founding, horse-shoes, hammers, 
nails and anvils, shears, scissors, gloves, shoemakers' imple- 
ments, (these last at Kilkenny) and various other devices of a 
similar character. I have engraved a numerous series of these 
slabs in my " Christian Monuments" 

There still remains a group of symbolical devices, that appear 
in early monuments, and sometimes in both architecture and 
seals, which may bo appropriately noticed at the conclusion of 
this chapter. These are what may be entitled devices of a 
sacred character, and they comprise : 1. The Emblems of the four 
Evangelists : the angel of St. Matthew, the winged lion of St. Mark, 
the tcinged ox of St. Luke, and the eagle of St. John ; these figures 
were constantly placed at the four angles of Brasses, and other 
commemorative memorials. 2. The emblems of our Lord's Passion : 
the cross, nails, scourges, crown of thorns, reed with hyssop, the 
dice of the soldiers, and some others, which are arranged in 
groups and charged upon shields. And, 3. The singular shield 
designed to symbolize the Holy Trinity, which is represented 
in No. 608 ; the example is drawn from the Brass at St. Cross, 
near Winchester, a.d. 1382, to John de Campeden. In the samo 



39G 



MOXLMKNTAL HERALDRY. 



Brass there is also a striking example of the shield of the Passion ; 
and other good examples occur in the inlaid pavement tiles at 
Great Malvern. Amongst many others, 1 may specify somo 




No. 608. 



beautiful small shields of the Passion that are sculptured upon 
the Iiamrydge monument at St. Albans. 



Digitized by Google 



No. G10. — Sccrctum of Henry Plantagenet, second son of Edwarh 

first Earl of Lancaster. 



CHAPTER XXIV. 

THE HERALDRY OF SEALS ANI&gt; COINS. 

SECTION I. 

* SEALS. 

The Art of Seal Engraving, in the first instance singularly mdc, 
but from the first giving promise of futuro excellence, attained 
to its highest perfection in England during the reign of Edward 
III., when it was very extensively practised, and enjoyed tho 
greatest popularity. 

Figures of every kind, architecture, heraldic and other de- 
vices, with every conceivablo variety both of accessory and of 
legend, were introduced into theso early Seals. Hence thoy 
afford such varied illustrations of the taste, feelings, fancy and 
humour, of tho religion also, and of tho superstitions of their 
times. History, Genealogy and Biography derivo from them 
both evidence and facts of peculiar importance ; and, above all, 
Heraldry might bo content to rely upon Seals alono to oxomplify 
its principles and to illustrate its practice. 

Seals were not introduced into England until the reign of 



Digitized by Google 



308 



THE HERALDRY OF 



Edward the Confessor, from whoso timo tho Royal Seals of Eng- 
land form an uninterrupted series of surpassing interest and 
value. Within a few years after the Norman Conquest, the 
use of Seals became generally established; and early in the 
twelfth century they were universally adopted for authenticating 
all written documents. On June 15, 1215, Magna Charth was 
scaled by King John; nor is a royal signature known to have 
confirmed a document until the time of Richard EL, at tho 
close of the fourteenth century. Perhaps the earliest approxi- 
mation to the signature of a royal personage appears upon a 
warrant of the Black Prince, a.d. 1370, under his privy-seal, 
which is subscribed by the Prince himsolf with tho words, 
Houmout, Ich Dien. 

Signet-rings were made either by engraving the required 
designs upon gems, agates, and other hard stones, or by cutting 
the devices and legends on the metal of tho rings themselves. 
Tho larger Seals (and many of the early Seals are of very con- 
siderable size) wore engraven on suitable pieces of gold, silver, 
• latten or brass, or steel. Jet is found to have been sometimes 
employed, with some other materials. In form the Seals are 
either circular or pointed ovals, the latter shape being that 
genorally adopted by Ecclesiastics, though not by any means 
restricted to them. The Royal Seals aro circular. In rare 
instances Seals are found lozenge-shaped, triangular, or cut to 
the form of an heraldic shield. The impressions were taken in 
wax of various colours, green, rod, different shades of brown, a 
dull yellow, and white. Like Coins, tho more important Seals 
were very commonly impressed on both sides. Such impressions 
wore appended to documents, and not stamped upon them. In 
taking these impressions, consequently, two dies or matrices, 
each having its own device and legend, were employed ; these 
were severally called the Seal and Counter-Seal ; but the double 
impression constituted a single Seal, its two sides being distinguished 
as its obverse and reverse. In the fifteenth century, it became 



Digitized by Google 



SEALS. 



309 



customary to cover the wax for the sake of preserving it with a 
wrapper of paper ; or various ingenious devices were employed 
for securing the wax from injury, by encircling the impression 
with! " fenders " formed of rushes, leaves, or plaited paper. 
" Fenders " of this kind have been found attached to Seals as 
early as 1380. Sovereigns and persons of high rank, in addi- 
tion to their official Seal, had a personal or private Seal, desig- 
nated a Secretum. The same individual also occasionally pos- 
sessed and sealed with more than one Secretum, and where 
several offices were held by one person, ho would use a separate 
Seal for each office. 

A very superficial classification of Seals is sufficient to convey 
a correct idea of tho comprehensive range of Seal Heraldry. 
Thus, Seals may be classified as, 

I. Ecclesiastical, and II. Lay or Secular. Each of these primary 
groups is divisible into (1). Official, and (2). Personal Seals. 
Tho Personal Seals necessarily comprise unlimited varieties; 
and tho Official Seals, both Ecclesiastical and Secular, may be 
sub-divided into those Seals of individuals which make a refer- 
ence to the dignities, offices, or preferments that may be held by 
them ; Common Seals of bodies corporate, and the like ; and 
Seals of office, that are not identified with any individual officer. 
Thus almost every possiblo application and expression of Heraldry 
appears in association with Seals. 

The student of Heraldry will do well to take up Seals with 
the intention to deal with them upon somo definite system. 
His study, to prove really satisfactory to him, had better be 
devoted, first, to one class of Seals, and then to other classes, 
in such order of succession as he may find to bo most desirable. 
For example, tho Great Seals of England, Scotland, and France 
form throe kindred groups for separate and yet connected study. 
Other groups may bo formed somewhat after the following 
manner : — The Seals of the Archiepiscopal and Episcopal Sees, 
with tho Arms of the Archbishops and Bishops : Monastic 



400 



THE HERALDRY OF 



Seals : Royal Secrota : tho Seals and Secreta of certain noble 
familios, as tho Db Bohuns, tho Fitz-Alans, the Mortimers, and 
others : the Seals of knights and esquires : tho several classes of 
Seals of a particular period : or miscellaneous Seals of any 
period. Or again, Seals may be selected for study with reference 
to certain special heraldic qualities in the Seals themselves — 
such Seals, for example, as illustrate Marshalling Arms, or Cadency, 
or Military Heraldry, or Supporters, or Crests, or Badges in associa- 
tion with shields, or varied forms of Shields, or Legends, or 
Architectural and other Accessories. In every instance Seals will 
more than satisfy tho student's highest expectations. Seals were 
evidently tho delight of tho early Heralds ; and Seal -Heraldry, 
accordingly, is Heraldry thoroughly in earnest Such Achieve- 
ments of Arms as abound in Seals, so complete, so spirited, so 
full of heraldic life and energy, rarely occur elsewhere. The 
History of Heraldry also is written in Seals with a compre- 
hensiveness, an accuracy, and a copious richness of illustration, 
that leave very little to bo desired. I have already shown, 
(Chap. XIV.), in what manner the aggroupment of several dis- 
tinct shields of arms upon a single Seal led to Marshalling ; and 
Marshalling, in its most expressive historical forms, is exempli- 
fied in multitudes of Seals. 

Tho Great Seals constitute a truly important chapter in 
Historical Heraldry. Every Seal has two distinct designs. In 
one tho Sovereign is represented on horseback, and in the 
other as enthroned. The mounted fjgures appear always to 
havo been regarded as tho Obverse, or Seal, and those enthroned 
as the Reverse, or Counter-Seal. Until the time of John, the 
throne in theso Seals is a mere stool, with certain ornamental 
accessories. In the second Seal of Henry III., the royal seat 
assumes a more dignified character. Edward I. copied his 
father's Seal, but tho design is better executed. Tho same 
Seal was used by Edward II., with a Castle of Castile added 
on each side of the throne. Great improvements in design, 



Digitized by Google 



SEALS. 



401 



including elaborate architectural enrichments, with peculiarly 
interesting Heraldry, were introduced into the different mem- 
bors of the series of Great Seals made by Edward III. He 
commenced by placing two fleurs de lys (his mother, it will be 
remembered, was Isabella of France) above the casiles in the 
Seal of his father and grandfather ; then he substituted for the 
old Seal (in the year of his accession, in the October of 1327) 
a new one, of improved general design, with the fleurs de lys 
much more emphatic. In 1340, a Seal appeared charged with 
two shields of France Ancient and England quarterly. After this, 
two Greal Seals of Edward HI. wore in use, sometimes concur- 
rently — one by the King himself, in which the legend runs Bex 
Francie et Anglie; and the other, used in England when the 
King was absent in France, with the legend Rex Anglie et 
Francie. Another Seal, made in accordance with the peace of 
Bretigny, a.d. 1360, omits the "Francie" altogether from the 
legend, but retains the quartered fleurs de lys in the shield as before. 
The " Francie," however, resumes its original place before the 
closo of the reign. Richard II. and Henry IV. merely sub- 
stituted their own names for the " Edvardus," and they used 
the same Seal as Edward III. In or about 1408 Henry IV. 
added another Seal, the largest and richest of all the niediawal 
Seals of England, in which tho fleurs do lys are reduced to three 
in each quarter of tho shield. Edward IV. placed a Hose of 
York in alternation with each word of the legend of his Seal, and 
afterwards a Fleur de lys, the whole being encircled with a 
bordure of Roses. Henry VII. introduced a Rose on a Branch: 
and Henry VIII. separated the words of his legend by alternate 
Roses and Fleurs de lys ; he added a Fleur de lys and a Lion to the 
obverse of his Seal, and eventually he adopted a Seal designed 
after the manner of tho Renaissance. 

The equestrian figures of tho obverso of the Great Seals afford 
characteristic illustrations of arms and armour, and also of horse 
equipments. In the second Seal of Richard I., the three lions 

2 D 



Digitized by Google 



402 



THE HERALDRY OF 



of England for the first time make their-appearanco on the royal 
shield. Edward I. places them on tho bardings of his charger, 
as well as upon his shield, but not upon his surcoat; and 
Edward 111. appears with a full display of royal blazonry upon 
the appointments as well of his horse as of his own person. The 
succeeding heraldic changes in the Great Seal of England I leave 
to the researches of students, The Great Seal of the Common- 
wealth, however, I may describe, as a curious example of Puritan 
Heraldry. This Seal, which was voted by the Commons, 
January 9th, 1649, was adopted on the 8th of the following 
month, when it was formally declared to bo " tho Great Seal of 
England." Two years later this same Seal appears in such a 
form as this : Obverse, — A Map of England and Ireland ; in the 
Cfiannel a Fleet ; in chief a Shield of St. George ; in hose a Shield of 
Ireland : Legend,— M The Great Scale of England, 1651 :" Reverse, 
— The Home of Commons sitting : Legend,— 14 In the third Tearc of 
Frcedome by God's Blessing restored, 1651." Upon his own Seal 
Oliver Cromwell bore,* quarterly, 1 and 4, the Cross of St George; 
2, (he Cross of St. Andrew ; 3, Ireland, (az., a harp or) ; over all in 
pretence, for Cromwell, sa., a lion rampt. guard, arg. : with these 
arms tho Protector assumed as Supportors the Crowned IAon of 
England with a Sea-horse; and he also borrowed the Helm, 
Crown, Crest, and Mantling, from the Royal Seals. Below his 
Shield is the motto, Pax. qu^eritur. bello. ; and the circum- 
scribing Legend is, Olivarius : Dei : gra : Heipub : Anglice : Scotia : 
et : Hibernal : dc. : Protector. This Seal was engraved with much 
delicacy, in the heraldio feeling of his time, by Thomas Simon. 

Tho Great Seals of several other personages of importance in 
the mediaeval history of England abound in heraldic accessories 
and devices ; amongst them, as an example of the greatest in- 
terest, I may specify the Great Seal of John of Ghent, as King 
of Castile. The Great Seal of Thomas, second Earl of Lancaster, 
is a very noble work. On his own holm and on the head of his 
charger, tho Prince displays a dragon as his crest, No. 524, 



Digitized by Google 



t 



Digitized by Google 



C 'A D E 2? C T. 



• « ... 



SF.AI. or WILLIAM PR UitMAKK 

KARL OK LINCOLN li:*S 

i 




r J w * «t .X L / 



Digitized by Google 



SEALS. 



403 



PL XXXV. The Counter-Seal is also large and very fine. The 
shield is differenced with a label of five points " of France," 
and on either sido of it there is a dragon. The Great Seal of 
Thomas of Woodstock, Duke of Gloucester, is another fine ex- 

* 

amplo of its class. 

The practice prevalent with the early seal-engravers to intro- 
duce some figure or figures of animals, all of them without doubt 
Badges, on each side of either the Shield or the Crest, I havo 
already stated to be in all probability instrumental in intro- 
ducing regular Supimrters as accessories of Achievements of Arms 
(see p. 277) ; and I have also referred to many fine and interest- 
ing examples of early Seals. It will bo necessary for mo hero 
to adduce only a few other examples in further illustration of 
the " Heraldry of Seals." No. G09, PI. XLV., is copied from 
Mr. Tlaxche's enlarged representation of the shield of William 
de Romare HI., Earl of Lincoln, who died as early as 11 &lt;J8. 
This shield is held by the Earl, armed in mail, with a cylindrical 
helm, and on horseback. The original appears to havo been 
lost, but a drawing of this very curious Seal is preserved in an 
heraldic MS. in tho City Library at Chester. The crosslets are 
undoubtedly very early M differences." A Secretum of William 
Longespee, Earl of Salisbury, (*' Fair Rosamond's" son), who 
died A.n. 1 22G, is simple and significant ; it is charged with his 
long sword and its belt : tho Seal bears the mounted figure of tho 
Earl, with his shield of six lioncols, and with two similar lioncols 
on the barding of his charger ; his Countess, Ela, is represented 
on her Seal standing between two lions, the Counter-Seal being 
charged with the six lioncels of her husband. These Seals are 
engraved in the &amp;disbury Volume of the " Archaeological Institute," 
where they illustrate an admirable paper (ono of an equally 
admirable series of papers of tho same class) on " Tlie Earldom 
of Salisbury" by Mr. John Gough Nichols, F.S.A. Ranulph 
de Blondkville, Earl of Lincoln and Chester, a.i». 1217-12.52, 
on his Seal carrios a shield charged with three garbs, and the 

2 i» 2 



Digitized by Google 



404 THE HERALDRY OF 

• 

same bearings appear upon the barding of his charger; the 
Counter-Seal has a similar shield. The Seal of Roger de Quenci, 
Earl of Winchester, a.d. 1 220-1 264, displays his shield masculee. 
And Henry de Laci, Earl of Lincoln, a.d. 1272, on both his 
Seal and his Secretum has his shield charged with his rampant 
lion. 

Two early Seals of the Nevilles exemplify both the forms of 
tho shields that were represented by the Heralds of Henry III. 
aud Edward I., and their treatment of the Label as a mark of 
Cadency ; Xos. 667 and 668, Chap. XXXI. Another Seal of the 




No, 7u:\— Seal of Macger lb Vavasbour. 




No. 266 a. -Seal of the Dajuphin Lor is. No. 702.— Seal of Tin r*tan. 



Digitized by Google 



SEALS. 



405 



same early period is charged with a similar shield of Sr. John, 
No. 700, Chap. XXXI. ; and in the corresponding Seal, No. 701, 
of a Sr. Jons of Sussex, the shield has its own chief with its six- 
pointed mullets charged upon a field of Warreune, a remarkable in- 
stance of heraldic combination. The shield in this interesting 
Seal is supported, after a very rude fashion, by three dragon-like 
monsters. Again: the heraldic Seal of Thurstan, " Diqicnmtoris 
Regis" No, 702, is another early example, with which may be 
associated the Seal of Madges le Vavassour, No. 703 : this last 
shield bears the letter M, tho initial of the owner's name ; or, 
possibly the device, which afterwards was modified into the well 
known fesse dance tto of the Vavassours, was originally designed 
to be a monogram of the two initials, M V. With this early 
group may be associated the Seal of the Dauphin Louis, a.d. 1216, 
which bears a shield semee de lys, No. 238 a, p. 404 ; (See also 
p. 73.) 

About the same period, Alice, Countess of ElT, the wife of 
Ralph, brother of IIuoii de Lusionan (father of Earl William de 
Valence, see p. 188,) on her Counter-Seal bears a shield of 
Ltisignan — barruhj arg. and az. — differenced with a label of seven 
points: she died in 1227, her daughter Maude having married 
tho Humphrey de Bohun of that time, and thus the two families 
of the powerful Earls of Hereford and Pembroke were connected. 
Nearly a century later, the Seal of John de Warrenne, Earl of 
Surrey, bears his shield — chequee or and az. — surmounted by a 
lion of England, and between the ttco barbels and tho crosslets 
fitcMes of tho house of De Barr, No. 329 c, PI. LXXXI. This 
great Earl had married Joan, daughter of Henry, Count De 
Barr and his Countess Alianore, eldest daughter of Edward I., 
and he was himself the lineal descendant of Geoffrey of Anjou. 
The Seal of the Countess Joan I have described, with a diagram, 
No. 329, at page 150. Sandford has engraved this Seal (p. 122, 
2nd edition), and it is also represented with its Charges in 
Heraldry of Fish, p. 70. 



Digitized by Google 



406 



THE HERALDRY OF 



Joan, the second daughter of EDWABP II. was married to 
Gilbert de Clare, Earl of Gloucester and Hertford, and their 
youngest daughter, Elizabeth de Clare, became the wife, first, 
of John de Burgh, eldest son of Richard, Earl of Ulster; 
secondly,^* Theobald de Verdun ; and thirdly, of Roger d'Amori. 
Her ISeal, No. 705 a, PL LXXXL, is another interesting and 
characteristic example of the aggroupment of several distinct 
Coats, so as to form a single compound composition, (see p. 150) : 
thus, in tho central compartment of the Seal is the shield of 
Roger d'Amori — harry nebulie of six arg. and gtt., a bend m. (Roll 
of E. II.) — environed by the three lions of England; in chief is 
Ulster, differenced by a label : in base is Verdun — or, frcitee gu., 
(Rolls of n. III. and of E. II., and Seal to tho Barons' Letter) ; 
to the dexter and sinister are Clare ; and at the four angles the 
castle and lion of Castile and Leon appear alternately. The 
Seal of Elizabeth, daughter of tho Joan last named by her last 
marriage with Roger d'Amori, bears a close resemblance to the 
Seal of her mother, and may very advantageously be compared 
with it as an illustration of the heraldic feeling and usage of the 
first half of the fourteenth century. This Seal, No. 705, which, 




No. 705.— Seal of Eliza- No. 700.— Sinl of No. 70 i.— Seal of John, 
beth. Lady Babdolf. Matilda de Filuol. Lord Baudolf. 



with tho Seal of the husband of Elizabeth d'Amori, John, Lord 
Bardolf, is attached to a deed, dated 1340, has a central circular 
compartment surrounded by eight others, the whole being on a 



Digitized by Google 



Digitized by Google 



S K A 1/ S. 



CHAPTER XX'V 




HaLteLXXXt 



Digitized by Google 



SEALS. 



407 



field of what I may describe as Gothic architectural diaper : in 
the centro is a shield of Bardolp, (No. 388 b, PI. XXVII.— az., 
three einqnefmh or.), with Ulster (without any label) in chief and 
base, to the dexter Clare, to the sinister iV Amort, and Castile and 
Leon as before in the compartments of the angles. The Seal of 
John, Lord Barfolf himself (he married Euz. d'Amori in 1337) 
is remarkable for its claboiuto tracories, No. 704, and the 
exquisite skill with which the seal-engraver has executed his 
rich design : the impression of this beautiful Seal which lies 
!&gt;eforo mo also shows that, without considerably enlarging the 
scale of the original, it is not possible to give a perfectly satis- 
factory engraving of it. The Seal of Elizabeth db Bury, 
figured'in Norfolk ArehozoL, (v., 301,) is another good specimen 
of a compound heraldic Seal. The small Seal of Matilda, 
daughter of Rooer Dl Lascelles, No. 700, is anothor graceful 
variety of this same interesting class : in the years 1 288 and 
1 203 sho was married, first to Sir W. De Hilton, and secondly 
to Sir R. De Filliol; accordingly, her Seal has the shield of 
Lascelles — org., three vhaplets gu. ; Hilton — an/., two bars az. ; and 
Filliol — gu., a lion rampt. org., over all a bendlct az. (Another 
shield of Filliol is vairee, a ronton gu.) Two other equally cha- 
racteristic examples of Seals of this class, Nos. 320 n, and 331, 
are described at page 1 52. 

The dimidiated Seal of Margaret, second Queen of Edward 1., 
for the first time exhibits a shield charged with the arms of 
England and FRANCE united in a single composition, No. 322, 
VI. XVIII. ; and the second Seal of this same Royal Lady, No. 
332 a. PL LXXXL, shows the Royal Shield of England environed 
with th* fienrs de lys of France on the field of the Seal itself, after 
the manner of a bordure; (See p. 152.) The Seal of William de 
('linton, Lord of Alleslev, who in 1337 was created Earl of 
Huntingdon, exemplifies precisely the same usage at a somewhat 
later period —a.d. 1333. This William DE Clinton was the 
sonond of the two sons of Sir .Tons' de Clinton and Ida his wife, 



408 



THE HERALDRY OF 



one of the co-heiresses of William de Odinosells, of Maxworth 
Castle, and ho married Juliana, sole heiress of Sir Thomas de 
Ley bourne. His Seal is charged with a shield of Clinton, (as it 
is blazoned for him in the Calais Roll)— arg., six crosslets fitchees 
• ml, and on a chief az. two mullets or., within an octofoil ; and the 
field of the Seal itself displays eight lioneels, which form a bordure 
about the shield, No. 332 b., PL LXXXI. ; see also No. 400, 
PL XXXVII. The Arms of Leybourxe are, az., six lioneels arg., 
Roll of H. III.; (Seo Archaol. Caniiana, L, 1, and v., 192.) A 
deed, dated Juno 13th, 1350, executed by this same Earl of 
Huntingdon, has the same shield, with the six lioneels of Ley- 
bourne upon the field of the Seal, and in base two small slips 
of oak ; (Archceologia, xxxviii., 272.) In the Roll of E. III., 
three mullets are charged on tho chief of William Clinton, and 
also on tho chief of his elder brother John, Lord Clinton, whose 
shield is without the crosslets : and in the Roll of R. II., John 
de Clynton bears, arg., on a chief az., two mullets or, pierced gu. ; 
(See p. 183). The Secrotum of Henry, second son of Edmond, 
the first Earl of Lancaster, who afterwards succeeded his father 
and his elder brother in that Earldom, claims particular atten- 
tion, No. 610, p. 397 ; (see also p. 235). It bears the shield of 
the Earl — England differenced with an azure bendlet, as he displayed 
the same composition upon his banner at Caerlaverock. This 
adoption of a bendlet " for Difference " by a younger son, in the 
early days of Cadency, shows a disinclination at that time to 
multiply the differencing charges upon labels. Henry, first 
Duke of Lancaster, the only son of Earl Henry, also differenced 
during his father's lifetime with a bendlet, as appears from his 
Seal, with the legend, s : henrici : lancastrie : comitis : dkrbeye, 
engraved in the Archeeol. Journal, vol. x. p. 329. In the Roll 
of E. III., tho Arms of this Prince are thus blazoned, 14 Le Count 
de Darby port les armes a" Engleterre a une boston d' assure : he was 
created Earl of Derby in 1337, succeeded to the Earldom of 
Lancaster on the death of his father in 1345, and became Duke 



» 

Digitized by Google 



Chapter xxiv. 

HATE LXX. 

Heraldic Seaj&gt;. 

No . m. Wv-*- - Thomas 1V~£ - &lt; ~ = 

A.D. 130.) : l»g*« 241. 2.i8, i&lt; /, W». 

No. 397a. (2, —Seal of WtuAM « ■«« !M - H«mu»™« : 

a.d. 1350: pages 18b, 409. 

« ■** HraB ° ,a,i A "- IW0 

pwgu ttw. 

No kb 4.)-So,l or TH.O.A, Holland, KO, E»l of tor; a.,, UWO 
N °- ' |«gc 247. 278. MO. 



SEALS. 



409 



in 1352. The Soal of Queen's College, Oxford, one of the most 
beautiful heraldic Seals in existence, is charged with three 
shields ; to the dexter a shield of Frame Ancient and England ; 
to tho sinister a shield of Queen Philippa, of Ilainault, bearing 
England quartering Ilainault, as in No. 337, p. 159; and in base 
the Arms of the College, or, three eagles disp. gu. Again, the fine 
Seal of Thomas Arundel, Archbishop of Canterbury, a.d. 139G- 
1414, in the base of tho composition is charged with the 
Royal Shield of Richard II., France Ancient and England impaled 
by the Confessor, No. 536 c, PI, LVIIL, and with the shield of 
the Archbishop himself ; Archceologia, xxvi., 297. Tho beau- 
tiful Seals of Thomas of Woodstock, Duke of Gloucester, and of 
Thomas Holland, K.G., Nos. 509, 525, PL LXX., I have already 
described ; see pp. 241, 258, 277. In Nos. 397 a, 398 a, also in 
PI. LXX., two Seals of the De Bohuns, Earls of IIereford and 
Northampton, aro represented ; the mullets of Northampton here 
have six points, and the Earl of IIe^ford shows his close alliance 
with the Crown of England by introducing three lions passant 
guardani into the composition of his Seal. Again, at p. 271, I 
have described the remarkable Seal of the Mortimers, No. 270, 
which appears at the end of this Chapter, together with the 
curious Seal of Edmund de Arundel, No. 270 a, which I am 
enabled to show side by side with No. 270. About a.d. 1400, the 
Seal of Sir William de Braose displays in tho centre of the com- 
position his own achievement of arms, with tho separate shields 
of Andeville, St. Leger, St. Omer and Malmains on either side. 
In his excellent and judicious 44 Guide to the Study of Heraldry " 
(page 38), Mr. Montagu refers to] another most interesting Seal 
of the same family of De Braose or De Brewys, which bears on 
a shield, az., crusiUe, a lion rampt. or, (See p. 175 and No. 390 A, 
PI. XXXVII.), dimidiating Mortimer (No. 99, p. 31), and having 
in chief charged on a round! e, the Arms of England. This Seal, 
attached to a deed dated 1373, (Harl. MS. 5805,) was adopted 
by Beatrice, youngest daughter of Roger Mortimer, first Earl of 



Di 



410 THE HERALDRY OF 

March, who was married, first to Edward, only son of Thomas 
de Broth erton, son of Edward I., and secondly to Sir Thomas de 
Braose. The son of Earl Thomas de Brotherton died, without 
issue, in his father's lifetime, and I know no ovidonce to show 
in what manner he may have differoncod the arms of his grand- 
father ; Thomas de Brotherton himself, however, differenced 
England with a label of three points org. In his notice of this Seal 
Mr. Montagu omits the very important label from the arms 
which ho assigns to this Earl and also to his son, the youthful 
first husband of Beatrice de Mortimer : in the Roll of E. III. 
the arms of Braose are blazoned with crosslets fitche'es. 

Some few of the most effective heraldic Seals display the 
armorial insignia charged upon Banners instead of shields. 
Thus, the Seal of Sir Henry Percy, eldest son of Henry, Earl of 
Northumberland, a.d. 1445, bears a lion holding a quartered Banner 
of Percy and Lucy, (see Chap. XXXI., Examples from Rolls of 
H. III. and Caerlavorock,) differenced with a label of three points : 
this Seal is executed in the most spirited manner, in unusually 
bold relief; see Strains' "Durham" Vol. I., Part 1, p. 158. One 
of the Seals of Walter, Lord Hunoerford, K.G., attached to a 
deed dated 1432, bears a noble helm and crest-coronet with a 
garb between two sickles for tho crest, and below the helm the 
shield coucUe is charged with, m., 2 bars org., in chief 3 plates, 
for Hungerford ; on either side of this shield is a large sickle, 
tho well-known Hungerford badge ; and above these sickles there 
rise two Banners, like the badges respecting each other, tho one 
on the doxter bearing Heytesbury, per pale indented gu. and vert., 
a chevron or y and that on the sinister bearing Hussey, barry of six 
enn. and gu. Another Seal of Lord Hungerford (a.d. 1418) boars 
Hungerford and Heytesbury quarterly, with two swans having their 
wings addorsed as supporters, and tho crest a talbot's Jtead issuing 
from a crest-coronet. The same quartered shield of Hungerford and 
Heytesbury appears in the vaulting of tho Canterbury cloisters, on 
a squaro panel, which is charged at each of its angles with a 



Digitized by Google 



SEALS. 411 

sickle. Lord Hungerford married Catherine, daughter and even- 
tually sole heir of Thomas Peverel, and thus he assumed the Peve- 
rel badge, the golden garb, and ho also bore their garb as his crest ; 
and this garb he associated with a most appropriate companion 
— the silver sickle, already his hereditary badge from the House 
of Heytesbury. Lord Hungerford derived the second Banner of 
his Seal from his own mother, Joan, co-heiress of Sir Edmund 
Hussey, which lady died in 1412, having survived her husband, 
Sir Thomas de Hungerford, the first " Speaker" of the Commons 
of England, since 1 398. The Seal of Sir Robert, second, but thon 
(a.d. 1445) eldest surviving son of Lord Hungerford, is smaller 
than his father's, but the heraldic composition is precisely tho 
same, with the addition of a label to the shield and to each of the 
Banners, while the blade of each of his sickles is charged with an 
ermine spot, for difference— a remarkable example of cadency 
marked upon badges. This Sir Robert died in 1459, ten years 
only after his father, leaving his widow, Margaret, only child 
and sole heiress of Lord Bottreaux and of Margaret de Beau- . 
mont, to found in Salisbury Cathedral the " Hungerford Chan- 
trey." On her Seal (a.d. 1465) this lady styles herself u Lady of 
Hungerford and Bottreaux," and she displays, as if they were 
forming a canopy over her own kneeling figure, two Banners, 
the one on the dexter supported by a lion, and bearing Hunger- 
ford impaling Bottreaux, for her husband and herself ; and tho 
one on the sinister supported by a griffin and charged with 
Bottreaux impaling Beaumont, for her father and mother: seo 
No. 427, PL XXVIII., and p. 279, for Bottreaux . The Seal of 
Roger de Leyburn, as early as tho time of Henry III., with his 
shield of arms, az., six lioncels org., (Roll II. III.,) has on the 
dexter side a small Banner charged tcith a cross : (Archwol. Can- 
tiana, v., 192. 

Mounted Effigies of tho Princes, Nobles, and Knights of the 
middle ages, with their surcoats, jupons and tabards of arms, 
their carefully-blazoned shields and their crested helms, and the 



Digitized by Google 



412 



THE HERALDRY OK 



bardings of their chargers also rich with heraldic devices, abound 
in the Seals to which the student of Heraldry will be certain to 
assign a placo of honour in his collection. As typical examples 
of this most interesting class, in addition to the Great Seals, I 
have selected the Seals of William Longespee, Earl of Salisbury, 
(died 1226) ; of Henry de Laci, Earl of Lincoln and Salisbury, 
(died 1272); of Robert de Vere, Earl of Oxford, No. 728, 
PL LXXXII., (died 1200) ; of Humphrey de BonuN, Earl of 
Hereford, (killed 1322); of William Montacute, Earl of Salis- 
bury, No. 720, (died 1343); and of Jaspar Tudor, K.G., Earl of 
Richmond and Duko of Bedford, (died 1497). 

Representations of the shipping of the olden time, which were 
taught to sharo in the heraldic sentiment of their era, are not un- 
common in media3val Seals. In many of these Seals the drawing 
is curiously imperfect in the proportions of the crews and of the 
ships that carry them, and also in the comparative sizes of these 
ships and the fish that are represented as swimming in their own 
» proper element beneath the keels. The special characteristic of 
these vessels when they carry sail is the heraldic blazonry, 
which is displayed upon the sails themselves ; see p. 288, and 
No. 530, PI. XXXV. The armorial compositions cover tho entire 
area of the sails, making them sails of arms, until in the six- 
teenth century shields of ample dimensions were charged upon 
tho sails, as in the Seal of Charles, Lord Howard of Effingham, 
the Lord High Admiral of England who encountered and, aided 
by the winds, gave so good an account of the Armada. In the 
Seal of Thomas Beaufort, Duke of Exeter, an earlier ■« High 
Admiral," (about 1416,) the sail of his ship is charged over its 
entire surface with tho Arms of Beaufort, No. 479, PI. XXXII. : 
at the stern of the vessel also there is a banner of France and 
England, and forward another banner bearing a simple cross. John 
Holland, Earl of Huntingdon, (a.d. 1436,) upon his Seal as 
"Admiral of England, Ireland, and Aquiiaine" displays a much 
nobler looking ship, with a splendid sail of Holland of Exeter ; 



Digitized by Google 



SEAI/S. [ 

CHAPTER XXIV. 




ROBERT DE VERE. FIFTH EARL OF OXFORD. 




W1LLIAAC AfONTAGUTE, EARL OF SAUSFIHY. 



I 

Plate LXXXII 



Digitized by Google 



SEALS. 



413 



No. 477 a, Plates XLV. and LXV. Anothor Seal of the same 
order, thirty years later, is charged with the splendid ship of 
Louis of Bourbon, Admiral of France : (See Arclueologia, xxvi., 479 ; 
also xiv., and xviii., 434.) The Seals of the Cinque Torts of Kent 
and Sussex exhibit several curious ships, which display their 
own proper banner, the lions and ships dimidiated, as in No. 326 a, 
Fl. LXXX., with the Banner and the Shield of England ; (see 
Sussex Archmol., 1. 14, and Heraldry of Fish, 178). The original 
Seal of Great Yarmouth in Norfolk, again, with its three very 
fine herrings in base, is charged with a fishing-vessel of the 
middle of the 14th century; (Heraldry of Fish, 150). 

The Counter-Seal of Jaspar Tudor, K.G., uncle of Henry VII., 




No. 683.— Amis of Jasi-ar Tt i*&gt;r, K.G., from hia Seal. (See p. 249.) 

an impression of which is attached to a grant of land in the 
county of Monmouth, boars his shield of arms, supported by a 
dragon and a wolf, and unsigned by a cap of estate of very largo 
dimensions, closely resembling the caps that are sculptured upon 
the Monuments of J)ukc Humphrey I'lantaoenet and Abbot 



Digitized by Google 



414 



THK HERALDRY OK 



Ramrydge, at St. Albany. It is remarkable that in this shield 
the quarters of France Modern have the flours do lys arranged 
one and two, instead of tioo and one; (Arclueol. xviii., 429,) No. 
C33. In a Seal of the " Wliite Carmelites of Hitchin" Hertford- 
shire, a quartered shield of England and France Modem, England 
being in the 1st and ±th quarters, is introduced, with another shield 
of England only ; (Archawl. xviii., 447.) The Seal of Edward IV. 
for his Chancer}- of Monmouth bears England with a label of 
France, and is a fino example of Seal Heraldry ; (Arclweel. Journal, 
xiv., 55.) The two curious Seals of Edward Plantagenet and 
Arthur Tudor, as Princes of Wales, already described, (see 
pp. 259 and 325, and PI. LX., No. 699), must bo here specified 
as valuable examples of their class; and with them may be 
associated tho judicial Seal — " s. ivdiciale" — of Queen Elizabeth, 
for the Counties of Caermarthen, Glamorgan, and Pembroke, on 
the reverse of which, beneath the quartered shield of France 
Modern and England, (tho fleur de lys two and one), supported by 
a dragon and an heraldic antelope, is a scroll with the] motto 
ic : den, and tho badge of three feathers grouped together, and 
having their tips bending over ; (Archqiol. xxxi., 495.) 

At page 279, I have referred to a few early Scottish Heraldic 
Seals of groat interest, and amongst others to tho Secretum of 
James I., a.d. 1429, which bears the Royal Shield of Scotland 
ensigncd with a crown of beautiful design, aud regularly sup- 
ported by two lions rampant guardant. These, the earliest Royal 
Scottish Supporters, continued in use until James V. substituted 
two unicorns for the two lions their predecessors. In the Garter- 
Plate of James V. of Scotland, who was elected a Knight of the 
Garter in 1533, tho shield is supported by two unicorns argent, 
royally gorged and cliained or. In this achievement the crest is a 
lion passant gu., upon a coronet or, Mding in his dexter paw a naked 
sword erect ppr., with the motto, 44 in my DEFENCE." Upon tho 
Great Seal of this Princo the lion of tho crest is passant guardant ; 
and it was so borno by James IV., and his three immediate prc- 



Digitized by Google 



SEALS. 



415 



decessors. The present Crest of Scotland, No. 567, PI. XLVI., 
was first adopted by James VI. of Scotland, tho first King of 
Great Britain. 

I must bo content here to adduce only three other examples 
of early Scottish Seals ; the first of these, the Seal of Walter 
Leslie, Lord of Ross, a.d. 1307, is perhaps the earliest compo- 
sition in which [quartering arms is known to have been intro- 
duced into Scottish Heraldry ; it bears, first and fourth, a bend 
charged with three buckles, for Leslie, and second and third, three 
lions rampt., for Boss. Tho next Seal, that of William, first Earl 
of Douglas and Earl of Mar, bears, 1 and 4, for Douglas, a human 
heart, and on a chief three mullets ; 2 and 3, for Mar, a bend between 
six crosslets fitchtes. And lastly, the Seal of Joan, daughter of 
John de Beaufort, Earl of Somerset, the widow of James L of 
Scotland, which bears tho arms of Scotland impaling those of 
Beaufort upon a lozenge. The first and the last of these three 
Seals are engraved in Mr. Seton's " Law and Practice of Heraldry 
in Scotland," a work which was published early in the last year, 
and shortly after the appearanco of tho first edition of my own 
volume. I gladly avail myself of this opportunity for recording 
my admiration of Mr. Seton's most excellent work, which cannot 
fail to command tho cordial sympathy of evory true lover of 
Heraldry, on whichever side of tho Tweed he may have his 
home. Mr. Seton has tho true feeling of a Herald, coupled with 
the resources of a sound and learned lawyer and an accomplished 
scholar, and he writes with an earnestness and also with such 
a thorough mastery of his subject, that his book at once takes 
rank as a standard authority. 

The woodcut which follows, No. 707, drawn from tho Seal of 
John, Earl of Arundel, exemplifies tho spirited manner in which 
the heraldic artists of the fifteenth century introduced Supporters 
into their compositions. The shield quarters Fitz Alan and Mal- 
travcrs — gu., a lion rampt. arg., and or,frcttee sa. (See p. 278.) 1 
may here refer students to tho learned paper by Sir Harris 



410 



THE HERALDRY OF 



Nicholas on the Seals affixed to the Barons' Letter to the Pope in 
1301, printed in the Archwologia, vol. xxi., pp. 192-231 ; to some 
" Observations on the use of Seals in England," in ArckaoL, xviii., 
pp. 12-20, and 47; to various curious and valuable papers on 




No. 707.— Seal of John, Earl of Arundel. 

Seals in the publications of the Archaeological Institute and the 
Archaeological Association; and to the numerous and varied en- 
gravings of Seals that illustrate Surtees' History of Durham. 

SECTION II. 

COINS. 

The Heraldry of tho Coinage in its general capacity may be 
said to be identical with other expressions of the Royal Heraldry 
of England. The Shield of Arms of the reigning Sovereign, with 
certain significant Devices as accessories, would naturally be 
expected to appear on English Coins ; and such an expectation 
in many instances would be realized. In such Coins tho Herald 
finds authoritative examples both of the Royal Shield and the 
favourite Royal Badges of each successive period. The Heads of 
the Sovereigns also place before him the changes in the form of 

Digitized by Google 



COIN'S. 



417 



tho Royal Crown which took place from time to time. But our 
Coins have other types, also heraldic, which possess great his- 
torical interest 

The Noble, (introduced by Edward III.), the Rose-Noble or 
Rial, (Edward IV.), the Angel, (Henry VI.), the Sovereign, 
(Henry VII.), the George Noble, (Henry VII.), all in gold, and 
the Crown in both gold and silver, (Henry VIII.), stand fore- 
most amongst those English Coins which do not bear the Royal 
Shield of Arms. The Noble of Edward III. is charged with a 
figure of the King, crowned, in armour, and with his sword, his 
shield bearing France Ancient and England quarterly, standing 
in a ship which carries at its mast-head &amp; pennon of St. George. 
This type is found to have been slightly modified under the 
succeeding princes. Thus, Queen Elizabeth is seated in her 
ship, and holds a sceptre ; and the ship itself is charged with a 
Tudor Rose, and carries at the bow a banner bearing the 
initial, a Gothic E. The Rose-Noble has one or moro Roses 
addod to the typo of tho Noble itself. Both these Coins 
have on their reverse a group of Royal Dovices with Crowns. 
The type of tho obverse of the Nobles gave rise to tho following 
couplet, the significance of which will be felt by every student 
of English Heraldry : 

*' Four things our Noble ehowcth unto me,— 
King, Ship, and Sword, and Power of the Sea." 

The Angel, on the obverse, boars a figure of tho Archangel 
St Michael thrusting down tho Serpent ; on tho reverse is a ship 
with a Cross for a mast, with the Royal Shield, a rose, and an 
initial. Tho George Noble has St George mounted, and tho 
Dragon. The Sovereign has a figure of tho reigning Prince, 
generally enthroned, the reverse bearing the Royal Shield, with 
various accessories. The Crown in gold of Henry VIII. has a 
crowned rose, and a crowned shield of arms, with the royal 
cypher. The silver Crown of Edward VI. has tho King on 
horseback, and tho Royal Shield; but that of Elizabeth sub- 
Htitutes a crowned bust for tho equestrian figure. In both of 

2 E 



Digitized by Google 



118 



THE HERALDRY QF COINS. 



4 



these silver coins the Royal Shield is charged in pretence with 
a floriated Cross, which extends beyond the shield, and divides 
tho legend into four parts. This arrangement of the Cross was 
a prevailing type of tho earlier Coins; it first appears with the 
shield of arms upon the shilling of Henry VII., and it was dis- 
continued by JAME8 I. The Fifteen-Shilling piece of that 
King is charged with the Royal Arms as borne by the Stuarts. 
The Crown of Charles II. has four crowned shields of England, 
Scotland, France, and Ireland in cross, tho shields in tho earlier 
examples alternating with tho Royal Cypher. Four shields 
placed in tho same manner also appear on the Crowns and 
Shillings of William III. and Anne, and they are reproduced 
upon Queen Victoria's Florins. 

It is remarkable that, until a comparatively recent period, 
tho types of all the Coins, whatever their size or value, are of 
equal artistic excellence ; nor is it less worthy of remark, that 
in our own times the types of tho Coinage should be distin- 
guishod by such excessivo degradation. With the sole exceptions 
of tho Sovereign and Crown that bear the St. George upon their 
Reverses, and the recent bronze coinage, our modern Coins appear 
in most unfavourable contrast with the Angels and Nobles that 
have long ceased to bo current in this country. I still retain, 
however, a long-cherished hope that tho Art of the Numismatist 
may at length revive, and again demonstrate its ability to execute 
truly noble Coins in the Royal Mint of England. 




No. 270.— Remains of the Seal of Ed- No. 270 a —Seal of Edmi nd de Arcn- 
mi-kd Mortimer, A.n. 1372. See p. 271. pel, afterward Earl, 1301-1326. 



Digitized by Google 



No. 522— Punache-Cregt of John, Lord ScRorE, K.6., from bis 
Stall-Plate. Sop pp. 121 and 267. 



CHAPTER XXV. 

THE HERALDRY OF ILLUMINATIONS. 

The Illuminations which at once illustrate mediaeval Manu- 
scripts, and take so important a part in conveying the historical 
information that wo derive from them, abound both in direct 
heraldio records, and in those practical suggestions which are of 
such great utility to modern Heralds. Authorities for a very 
considerable number of early shields and badges are supplied 
by these Hluminations, and, at the same time, they are rich in 
diapers, and other heraldic accessories. So that the student of 
Heraldry may always look to these early works, as to treasuries 
well stored with objects of value and interest. In like manner, 
Heraldry provides for the Illuminators of our own times abundant 
materials exactly adapted to their use. 

The revival of the early Art of Illumination, and the degree 
of popularity which it now enjoys, naturally lead to inquiries 
relative to the means that may be best calculated to render the 

2 e 2 



420 



THE HERALDRY 



revived Art permanently popular. I believe that this can be 
accomplished only by rendering it an Art really our own. The 
mere copying early Illuminations, however attractive in itself 
and really useful as a system of study, will not suffice to produce 
a school of modern Illuminators. Neither will the Art of Illu- 
mination rise oven to be recognized as an universally desirable 
accomplishment, unless it be made to lead beyond the most 
careful colouring of certain sentences and words more vetusto. 
Our Illuminators must embody somo thought of their own in 
their works ; they must make their works vehicles for recording 
something and conveying something, that they have themselves 
imagined and devised ; and their illuminated details and acces- 
sories must have a genuine art-character, and a true feeling for 
the particular art of Illuminating as it is practised by themselves. 
I do not desire to suggest that all modern Illuminators should 
aspire to becoming independent designers of whatever they may 
illuminate. But while the great majority of them freely avail 
themselves of the aid that lithography is always ready to render, 
(an aid which their mediaeval predecessors would have been but 
too thankful to havo secured, had it been placed within their 
reach), it is most important that modorn Illuminators should 
seek, not only for those printed outlines that are complete in 
themselves and require only the application of gold and colour, 
but such others also as may be of a suggestive character, and 
which the Illuminators may apply in carrying out certain ideas 
of their own. 

There appear to be four distinct classes of modern Illumina- 
tions. The first consists of Texts from the Iloly Scriptures, or 
other brief passages of a directly roligious character. The 
second class comprises choice brief extracts from various authors, 
both poets and prose writers. To the third class belong complete 
illuminated metrical works. And in the fourth class I would 
comprehend every such extract, version, copy, or composition 
as may bo directly either historical, or biographical, and which 



Digitized by Google 



OF ILLUMINATIONS. 



421 



consequently may obtain from Heraldry its happiest and most 
appropriate illustrations. Heraldry, it is true, will provide 
much that will prove to be eminently attractive, and truly con- 
sistent also, in Illuminations of every class ; for, if it does not 
always offer Shields of Arms, or Banners, or Badges, it is certain 
to suggest treatment and to supply accessories. But in all 
historical subjects, Heraldry is the Illuminator's most valuable 
ally. And those are subjects that are certain to be held in 
esteem. Passages from the old chroniclers, brief but emphatic 
summaries of great historical periods, graphic records of cele- 
brated historical incidents, or similar biographical sketches of 
the representative Personages of History ; historical charts and 
genealogies of every kind, and, in many instances, family gene- 
alogies, records and traditions, are all equally well suited to 
form materials for Hlumination ; and, in every case, Heraldry is 
repleto with exactly what the Illuminator will find to bo best 
qualified to illustrate his work, and also to impart to it the most 
brilliant of decoration. 

Groups of historical shields, derivable from early Kolls of 
Arms, with appropriate borders and brief legends, form beautiful 
pages for Illumination. Groups of such shields and borders, 
with certain other compositions of a somewhat similar class, 
amateurs may desire to obtain in outline, and also various acces- 
sories and illustrations which are well adapted to be made 
popular through the agency of lithography. I venture to pro- 
mise to Heraldio Illuminators that trustworthy outlines of this 
description shall bo provided for their use. The promise con- 
tained in the last sentence yet remains, whilo the third Edition 
of this Volume is in the press, to bo fulfilled : it has not been 
forgotten, however, and I trust that it'will be speedily realized. 



Digitized by Google 



No. «02.-ArniB of the Heralds' College, from the Shield blazoned in 

the College. See p. 364. 



CHAPTER XXVI. 

GENEALOGIES. 

Amongst the most important of the professional duties of the 
Herald who holds Office in the College of Arms, are the investi- 
gation, tho display, and the faithful enrolment of Genealogies. 
And in tracing out and arranging Historical Genealogies, the 
Amateur Herald will find that he is enabled to elucidate and to 
illustrate History in the clearest and most impressive manner. 
In the History of England, indeed, there occur many important 
chapters and no less numerous episodes, all of which absolutely 
rely upon genealogical illustration to render them clearly intel- 
ligible. And the genealogical form of tabular arrangement is 
peculiarly adapted to convey historical teaching with emphatic 
distinctness, while it is always available for prompt reference. 
I much question whether the History of the " Wars of tho 
Roses" can be eithor written or read satisfactorily without his- 
torical Genealogies. Similar Genealogies are most valuable 
allies to the Student of History, when his attention is directed to 



Digitized by Google 



GENEALOGIES. 



423 



the claim of Edward III. to the Crown of France ; or when he 
is reading the record of the struggles between Stephen and 
Matilda ; or when he desires to 6eo very clearly what was the 
relationship between Mary Stuart and Lord Darnley ; or how 
far Elizabeth of York had in her own person a title to the 
Crown ; or the relative positions of Mary and Jane Grey, and 
those of James I. and his nnhappy kinswoman, Arabella Stuart. 
Various other examples will readily occur to the student of 
English History. 

The heraldic laws of exact definition, simple statement, and 
rigid conciseness, have full foroe in the arrangement and drawing 
up of Genealogies. The system which the student may adopt 
with advantage may be briefly explained. Tho materials which 
are to be used for the formation of any historical Genealogy 
consist, first, of notes of the facts that are to bo set forth in it, 
and secondly, of a recognized series of abbreviations and signs. 
The notes will always comprise the names of every person who 
is to take a part in the Genealogy, with all dates and every 
circumstance that it may be desirable to record. 

The following abbreviations and signs have been found to 
work well: Son, son of: dau., daughter of: S. and H., son and 
heir of: dau. and E., or coh., daughter and heiress, or co- 
heiress : W., wife of: M., was married : =, placed between their 
names, signifies that the two persons specified were husband and 

wife: *J signifies that such persons had children: I under 

any name, signifies that the person had children : S. P., (sine 
prolt), without children : V.P. (yttdpatris), in his, or her father's 
lifetime; d., died, at and on: bu., was buried at : won. i has a 
monument still existing : eff., has a monumental effigy : h. t killed 
in battle: ex., executed: murd., murdered: ban., banished: ac, 
accession, or came to tho crown : or., coronation, or crowned : 
dep., deposed : K., King : Q., Queen : P. and Pm., Prince and 
Princess : Arehbp. and Bp., Archbishop and Bishop : D. and Dm. 



Digitized by Google 



■124 



GENEALOGIES. 



Duke and Duchess: E., Ct., Ctss., Earl, Count, and Countess: 
Ba., Bnss., Baron, Baroness : Ld., Lord : Ly. t Lady : Kt., Knight : 
PL, Plantagenet: Ik, Tudor: Siu., Stuart: La., Lancastrian: 
Yk., Yorkist : W. A., Westminster Abbey : Cath., Cathedral : Ch., 
Church : Ab., Abbey. 

In arranging a Genealogy, the main line of descent is to be 
indicated by keeping the successive names in a vertical column. 
All persons of the same generation are to have their names in 
the mine horizontal line. Spaces of equal depth are to be allotted 
to each generation. The members of the same family are to bo 
arranged in their order of birth in two groups, the sons first, then the 
daughters, each series commencing from the heraldic dexter side 
of the paper. Should it be necessary especially to denote that 
any individual is the eldest, or the second, or any other son, 
this may be done by placing the heraldic mark of Cadency over the 
name. Continuous Lines carry on and denote the descent, and the 
formation, and the connection of the families ; and, in placing 
theso Lines, great care must bo taken, lest a connecting lino 
should point to any name not included in the order of blood - 
relationship. In extended Genealogies, distinct groups, (as 
Lancastrians and Yorkists), may be indicated by inks of different 
colours; Royal personages may have their names in peculiar 
letters ; and the direct line of descent and succession may also 
be indicated by capital letters, with initials in red. Badges may 
advantageously be placed with the names, as may shields of arms 
in somo instances; other shields and heraldic insignia, with 
references, &amp;c, may be placed in the margin. The figures 1 and 
2 may bo introduced to denote first and second marriages : and, in 
like manner, any simple expedient may bo adopted that may 
express a circumstance necessary to bo indicated and observed. 
It will be noted, that the rule for arranging the names of 
brothers and sisters does not exclude the heir from occupying a 
central position in the vortical column of succession; also, that 
whore tho same fathor or mother may havo families by more 



Digitized by Google 



GENEALOGIES. 



425 



than one marriage, the children of each marriage are to form distinct 
groups. I must add, that the actual arrangement of any historical 
Genealogy must bo determined in a great measure by the leading 
object which it is intended to illustrate. Thus, I have arranged 
the accompanying brief example upon two different plans, each 
of them having its own especial aim. This examplo is a portion 
of the Royal Genealogy of England. It traces the descent of 
James I. upwards for four generations; and it indicates the 
blood-relationship that existed between the parents of that 
prince, and shows his own relative position with reference to 
both his predecessor on the English throne, and his kinswoman, 
Arabella Stuart. My Genealogy, No. 1, treats of the first 
Stuart Sovereign of Great Britain as the descendant of the 
Tudors, and as their heir and representative ; but in No. 2, ho 
appears as tho representative of the Stuarts who, happening also 
to represent the Tudors, became the heir of both those Royal 
Houses. The same historical teaching is convoyed by both 
Genealogies, of which No. 1 takes the English view, while in 
No. 2 tho Scottish aspect of the subject is taken. In No. 1 the 
relationship between Elizabeth and Mary Queen of Scots is 
shown, and also that between Elizabeth (and therefore between 
her sister, Mary,) and Lady Jane Grey. The space at my 
disposal has compelled me to omit many details, and in No. 2 
I have given the names only : still these genealogical sketches 
may servo to exemplify the system for forming historical Gene- 
alogies. Of course, these sketches might be rendered more 
graphic by the use of coloured inks, and by tho addition of 
Shields of Arms and Badges. See pages 426, 427. 



Digitized by Google 




Digitized by Google 



GENEALOGIES. 



427 




Digitized by Google 




No. 299. — Arms of the Duke op Norfolk, tho Earl Marshal, from the 
Shield blazoned in tho Heralds' College See p. 168. 



CH AFTER XXVII. 

PRECEDENCE. 

The Order of Precedence, a matter of no inconsiderable im- 
portance in a highly civilized and equally complicated condition 
of society, was first established upon a definite system by a 
statute of Henry VHX, in 1539. Various subsequent regula- 
tions have taken effect, and have contributed, in connection with 
Royal Letters Patent, to produce the Precedence now regarded 
as established and practically in force amongst us. 

This order of Precedence may bo considered to be based upon 
tho following fourfold principle; first, that persons of every 
degree of rank, except descendants of the blood royal, who 
always have precedence, should take place according to tho 
seniority of tho creation of such rank ; secondly, that the 



Digitized by Google 



PRECEDENCE. 



429 



younger sons of each preceding degree of rank should take place 
immediately after the eldest son of the next succeeding rank ; 
thirdly, that in certain cases the tenure of offico should con- 
stitute actual rank so long as such tenure should continue ; and, 
lastly, that while a married woman participates in her husband's 
rank, (though not always in his official rank), the same pre- 
cedence is due to all the daughters of a family that is enjoyed by 
the eldest son of that family. 

The Order of Precedence. 

The Sovereign. 

The Prince of Wales. 

The Sovereign's Younger Sons. 

The Sovereign's Grandsons. 

The Sovereign's Uncles. 

The Sovereign's Cousins. 

The Archbishop of Canterbury. 

Tho Lord Chancellor. 

The Archbishop of York. 

Tho Archbishop of Armagh. 

Tho Archbishop of Dublin. 

Tho Lord High Treasurer, (now represented by the " Lords 
of the Treasury," of whom the 44 First Lord " is popularly 
entitled the " Prime Minister.") 

The Lord President of the Council. 

The Lord Privy Seal. 

These groat Officers of State precede all Peers of their own 
Degree, (that is, if Dukes, they rank above all other Dukes ; if 
Earls, in like manner, &amp;c), in the following ordor : — 

The Lord Great Chamberlain. (When in the actual per- 
formance of official duty.) 

The Lord High Constable. 

The Earl Marshal. 



Digitized by Google 



430 PRECEDENCE. 

Tho Lord Steward of the Queen's Household. 
Tho Lord Chamborlain of the Queen's Household. 
Tho Secretaries of State. 

Then tho Peers according to thoir Patents of Creation : — 

Tho Dukos. 

The Marquesses. 

Tho eldest Sons of Dukes. 

The Earls. 

The eldest Sons of Marquesses. 

The younger Sons of Dukes. 

The Viscounts. 

The eldest Sons of Earls. 

The younger Sons of Marquesses. 

The Bishops of London, Durham, and Winchester. 

The Bishops according to seniority of Consecration. 

Tho Barons. 

The Speaker of the House of Commons. 

Tho Treasurer and tho Comptroller of the Royal Household. 

The Master of tho Horse. 

The Secretaries of State, being under the degree of Barons. 
The eldest Sons of Viscounts. 
The younger Sons of Earls. 
Tho eldest Sons of Barons. 

The Knights of the Garter, the Thistle, and St. Patrick, (not 
being Peers). 

The Privy Counsellors. 

The Chancellor of the Exchequer. 

Tho Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster. 

Tho Lord Chief Justice of tho Queen's Bench. 

The Master of the Bolls. 

The Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas. 

The Lord Chief Baron of the Exchequer. 

The Judge Ordinary. 

The Lords Justices of Chancery. 



Digitized by Google 



PRECEDENCE. 



nam a; 



431 



The Vico Chancellors. 

The Judges of the Queen's Bench and Common Pleas. 
Tho Barons of the Exchequer. 
The younger Sons of Viscounts. 
The younger Sons of Barons. 
The Baronets. 

The Knights Grand Crosses of the Bath. 
The Knights of the Star of India, 

The Knights Grand Crosses of St Michael and St. George. 
Knights Commanders of the Bath and other Orders. 
Knights. 

Serjeants-at-Law. 

Masters in Chancery and in Lunacy. 
Companions of tho Bath and other Orders. 
Eldest Sons of the younger Sons of Peers. 
Eldest Sons of Baronets. 
Eldest Sons of Knights. 
Esquires: including 

Esquires to Knights of Orders of Knighthood ; the eldest 
Sons of all tho Sons of Viscounts and Barons, and the eldest 
Sons of all the younger Sons of Peers, and their eldest Sons in 
perpetual succession : 

The Sons of Baronets : 

Persons holding the Queens Commission, whether in a civil, 
naval, or military capacity : 

Members of tho Royal Academy of Arts : 
Barristers : 

Masters of Arts, and Bachelors of Law : 

Clergymen : 

Gentlemon. 

Before marriage, Women take Precedence by tho rank of their 
father, and all the sisters of any family have the same degree. 
By marriage, women participate in tho dignities of their hus- 



Digitized by Google 



432 



PRECEDENCE. 



bands, except in the case of certain dignities that are strictly 
official ; but tho dignities of wives are not imparted by marriage 
to their husbands. 

Marriage with an inferior does not affect the Precedence that 
any woman may enjoy by birth or creation ; but the wife of any 
Peer always takes her rank from her husband. Womon ennobled 
by marriage, retain their rank as widows; but, should they 
contract second marriages, that rank ceases, and their Precedence 
is thenceforward determined absolutely either by the rank of their . 
second husbands, or by their own personal dignity of birth. 

Tho wife of the eldest son of any degree precedes the sisters 
of her husband, and also all other ladies of the same degree with 
them, such ladies having place immediately after tho wives of 
their eldest brothers. This principle of Precedence obtains in 
all families of the samo degree amongst themselves. 




No. 627 a. — Badge of Riciunn II. 
From his Effigy at Westminster. (See p. 304.) 



Digitized by Google 



No. 613. — Howard Modern. See p. 434. 



CHAPTER XXVIII. 

AUGMENTATION AND ABATEMENT. 

SECTION L 

AUGMENTATION. 

An "Augmentation" I have defined to be 44 an honourable 
addition to an heraldic composition, which is complete and dis- 
tinct in itself, and conveys emphatically a definite signification 
of its own (p. 93). In the olden time these Augmentations 
were granted, Camden tells us, 44 some of mere grace and some of 
merit ;" and he instances the grant of the Arms of the Confessor 
to the Hollands and to Thomas Mowbray, (see pp. 126, 15:5, and 
247), as examples of Augmentation by the "more grace " of King 
Richard II. ; but, on the contrary, Henry VIII., 44 for merit,'* 
granted to Thomas, Duke of Norfolk, and Ins posterity, for his 
victory at Flodden Field, wherein King James IV. of Scotland 
was slain," September 9, 1513, as a commemorative Augmenta- 
tion, the Royal Shield of Scotland, having a demi-lion only, which 
is pierced through the mouth with an arrow, to be charged upon the 
silver bend of Howard. The two shields of this noble House, 

9 f 



Digitized by Google 



434 



AUGMENTATION AND ABATEMENT 



the one without, and the other with the Flodden Augmentation, 
may be severally distinguished as Howard Ancient, No. 394. 
PI. XXXVII., and Howard Modern, No. 613, p. 433. 

Differencing by Augmentation, even when the fresh acces- 
sions to a Shield have resulted from 11 more grace," is eminently 
historical in its character: and this association between Coat- 
armour and History thus affected in augmented Arms, neces- 
sarily becomes peculiarly interesting as well as decided and 
emphatic in the case of every Augmentation which refers to som^ 
well-known event, or which arose out of some memorable 
incident. 

The Augmentations granted out of his 4t mere grace " by 
IIenry VIII. to some of his Consorts are blazoned in pp. 309-10. 
Another most remarkable example, of an earlier period, is the 
Augmentation granted by Richard II. to his favourite, Robert 
de Vere, K.G., ninth Earl of Oxford, Marquess of Dublin and 
Duke of Ireland : az., three crowns or, within a bordure arg., being 
a differenced Coat of St. Edmund, to be borne quarterly with the 
Arms of de Vere. This Augmentation appears to have been 
regarded as the Arms of Ireland; (See Mr. J. Gough Niciiol's 
Paper on the Earldom of Oxford in vol. ix. of Archceol Journal.) 
Again, to Thomas Manners, K.G., first Earl of Rutland (grand- 
son of Anne Plant agenet, sister of Edward IV.), Henry VIII. 
granted a chief of France and England, — that is, quarterly 1 and 4, 
az., two fieur8 de lys or ; 2 and 3, gu., a lion of England. I add a 
small group of examples of augmented shields of Camden's second 
division— that " of merit:"— 

1. Pelham, an Augmentation quarterly, in commemoration of 
the capture of John, King of France, at Poictiers, by Sir William 
Pelham :—gu., two demi-belts poiewise, in fesse, their buckUs in chief, 
arg., in the 2 and 3 quarters with Pelham— n*., three pelicans arg., 
mining themselves ppr., No. 132 c, p. 436. 

2. Wodehouse, Baron Wodehouse, in Memory of Agincourt : — 
sa., a chevron or gontUe du sang, between three cinquefoils erm. : 



Digitized by 



AUGMENTATION AND ABATEMENT. 



435 



Crest, a dexter hand issuing from clouds, holding a club, all ppr., en- 
signed with the Motto, M Frappez fort :" below the shield the word, 
" Azincourt." 

3. Scott of Thirlstane (a.i&gt;. 1542 :) the Royal trcssure of Scot- 
land, charged upon a field or ; on a bend az., between two crescents 
a mullet gold ; Crest, 14 a bundle of lances, with the words, ' Beady, 
aye Beady: " 

Many other Scottish shields, in like manner, are augmented 
with the Royal tressure : as those of Gordon, Fleming, Living- 
stone, Maitland, Montgomery, Charteris, Primrose, Bellenden, 
and others: (See Seton, p. 451). 

4. Sir John Clarke, on his taking the Duke of Longueville 
at the u Battle of Spurs," near Theronenne, (24 days before 
Flodden, Aug. 16, 1513): the arms of the captured Duke, to be 
charged on a sinister canton upon the paternal shield of Sir 
John,— on a sin. canton az., a demiram salient arg., armed or / in 
chief, twofienrs de lys gold, over all a baton dexter : and for Clarke, 
arg., on a bend gu., between three pellets, as many swans, ppr. 

5. Lane of Bently, Staffordshire, in memory of tho escape of 
Charles II., after Worcester, through the devoted courage of 
Jane Lane : on the shield of Lane, per fesse or and az., a chevron 
gu., between three mullets counterchanged, a canton of England : Crest, 
a strawberry-roan horse salient, couped at the flanks, bridled so., bitted 
and garnished or, supporting between his feet a regal crown. 

6. Keith, Earl of Kintore, (a.d. 1677), in remembrance of tho 
safe keeping and restoration of the Scottish Kegalia : — quarterly, 
1 and 4, gu., a sceptre and sword in saltire, with an imperial crown 
in chief, within an orle of thistles or ; with 2 and 3, arg., a chief 
paly of six or and gn. 

7. Sir Cloudesley Shovel, (a.d. 1692,) to commemorate two 
naval victories over the Turks and one over the French;— gu., a 
chevron erm., augmented with, in chief, two crescents, and, in base, a 
flcur-de-lys or. 

8. JonN Churchill, K.G., first Duke of Marlborough : — an 

2 f 2 



Digitized by Google 



436 ABATEMENT. 

inescutcheon of St. George, charged with another of France Modern ; 
No. 615, p. 439, and Chap. XXXI. 

9. Richard, Marquess Wellesley, K.G., K.P. :— an inescutcheon 
of Mysore, that is, purpure, an estoile vert, bordered and radiated or, 
between eight stripes of the royal tiger of Tippoo Sultaun, salt ire-wise, 
gold ; with other appropriate Augmentations to his Crests and 
Supporters. 

10. Arthur Wellesley, K.G., first Duke of Wellington : An 
inescutcheon of England ; No. 614, p. 439, and Chap. XXXI. 

11. William Carnegie, seventh Earl of Northesk: In chief, 
the word Trafalgar, and upon the breast of the Carnegie eagle o 
naval crotcn. 

Amongst the noblest Augmentations M for merit," may be 
numbered accessions of fresh " Honours," to the Colours of our 
Regiments, and every " Clasp " that is added to the Medals of 
our sailors and soldiers ; (See pp. 291 and 352). 



hi- 




j : 


V 

X 




&gt; 


W 



No. 132 c— Peluam. Sec p. 434. 
SECTION II. 

ABATEMENT. 

The term Abatement first appears in the heraldic writings of 
the sixteenth century, and it is then assigned to certain marks 
said to be designed to indicate the reverse of honourable Aug- 
mentations. In practice any such thing as an heraldic Abate- 
ment is unknown, with the sole exception of the distinctions 
adopted for the purpose of indicating illegitimate descent. 

In modern Heraldry, the Abatement of Illegitimacy that has 



Digitized by Google 



ABATEMENT. 437 

boon generally recognized, is a bendlet or baton sinister : and this 
bendlet is represented as couped at its extremities, so that it does 
not extend across the entire field of an^ shield. But the early 
Heralds, whatever their feelings may have been upon this point, 
certainly never promulgated as a law of heraldic usage any par- 
ticular difference that should distinguish the arms of persons 
not of legitimate birth, or those of the descendants of such 
persons. It would appear, indeed, that this Abatement was 
generally if not always determined in accordance with the 
wishes of different individuals. Some Abatement of illegitimacy 
was held and admitted to be necessary ; and provided that the 
Abatement appeared on the shield, it might assume whatever 
form might bo considered best suited to each particular occa- 
sion. Two or three early examples will illustrate tho practice of 
the old Heralds with sufficient clearness. 

Sir Roger de Clarendon, son of tho Black Prince, bore, or, on 
a bend sa., three ostrich feathers, labelled, arg. His near kinsman, 
the son of John of Ghent, John de Bkaufort, before the Act of 
Legitimation in 1397, boro a somewhat similar parody of the 
arms of his father —a similar parody, at any rate, of the second 
aud third quarters of his father's shield, retaining his label : per 
pale arg. and az., on a bend gu. t three lions of England, ensigned with 
a label of France. The tinctures of tho field, argent and azure, 
were the Livery Colours of the Lancastrian Plantaoenets. John 
de Beaufort afterwards retained theso same tinctures in his 
bordure compony : see p. 248. Sir John de Clarence, son of 
Thomas, Duke of Clarence, (himself the son of Henry IV.), 
boro, per chevron gu. and az., in chief ttoo lions counter-rampant, and 
in base a fleur-&lt;le-lys, all or. Glover gives as tho arms of a 
natural son of one of the Fitz-Alans, Ralph de Arundel, a shield 
of Fitz-Alan, flanched arg. : that is, a shield arg., having flanches of 
Fitz-Alan and Warrenne quarterly, as they were quartered by the 
Earls; No. 622, p. 4.J8. 

The baton sinister was borne by Arthur, Viscount Lisle, son of 
Edward IV. : by Henry, Duke of Richmond, son of Henry VIII. : 



Digitized by Google 



438 



ABATEMENT 



and by Charles Somkrset, Earl of Worcester, son of Henry 
Beaufort, third Duko of Somerset. Tho seal of this Charles 
Somerset shows that ms baton crossed his quartered arms, but 
was couped by his borduro : the baton itself is plain and very 
narrow. The eldest son of this Earl removed his father's baton 
from his arms, and charged Beaufort upon a fesse on a silver 
shield, thus recognizing tho heraldic propriety of retaining an 
Abatement, though rejecting tho balon. The arms of the 
natural sons of Charles II. were all abated with tho baton 
sinister, which was differenced after the manner of a label ; 
except in the case of the Duke of Richmond, who differenced with 
a bordure. At the present day, tho baton of the Duko of Sr. 
Alban's is, gu. y charged with three roses arg. ; that of the Duke of 
Cleveland is, ermine ; and the baton of the Duke of Grafton is, 
compony arg. and az. Tho Duko of Richmord bears the arms of 
Charles II., (No. 537, PI. LV1II.), within a bordure componee arg. 
and gu. y charged with eight roses of the last, barbed and seeded ppr. 
Except in instances such as these, in which the Abatement is 
charged upon the Royal Arms, there appeal's no reason for trans- 
mitting the baton sinister with its peculiar signification ; in all 
less exceptional cases some mark of cadency might very pro- 
perly bo substituted in its stead, or all traces of Abatement 
might be removed from their shields of arms by the descendants 
of persons, to whom arms had been granted abated with a sinister 
baton. 




No. 622.- Sir Ralph de Ari npel, p. 437. 



Digitized by Google 



No. 614. — AimiUR Wellesley, No. 015. — SrENCEit C uracil ill, 

Duke of Wellington. Duke of Mabluoroigii. 

See pp. 435, 43G aud 443. 



CHAPTER XXIX. 

MODERN HERALDRY. 

When not historical of the past, it is tho office of all true 
Heraldry to be historical for the future. Our Modern Heraldry, 
accordingly, if it would be consistent with both its character 
and its traditions, must take a becoming part in producing that 
Chapter of English History which we shall hand down to 
succeeding generations. It is indeed true that the state of 
things has undergone a marvellous change since Heraldry 
reigned in its full glory under the Plantagenets, and also since 
Henry VIII. held the assumption of the Arms of the Confessor 
by a Duke to be an overt act of high treason ; and yet jtho office 
of the Herald has by no means fallen into abcyanco amongst 
ourselves. Our Heralds have still to record and to preserve tho 
memory of both public and private Genealogies. They have to 
take note of the Succession of the Inheritors of old Titles, and 
of the creation of new ones. They have to preside over and to 
confirm tho Assumption and the Bearing uf Armorial Insignia 



Digitized by Google 



440 



MOl»EHN HKKALDRY 



of whatever kind : and all new Grants of Arms come nnder their 
cognizance, and are enrolled in their College. They also direct 
all royal and national Solemnities and Pageants ; and they are at 
once the guardians and the exponents of the heraldic Records of 
their predecessors. 

In some particulars our Heraldry must inevitably suffer, when 
it is brought closely into contrast with the Heraldry of the 
olden time. For example, when Helms were really worn, and 
when Shields were in actual use, a Shield of Arms and a Crest 
had a significancy which now it is not possible for them to 
retain. We must be content to accept Shields and Crests as 
heraldic accessories, the bequest of the early Heralds, which we 
can only employ in reference to Heraldry itself. Shields and 
Crests, however, come to us possessing hereditary claims to 
recognition and acceptance in thoir heraldic capacity ; and so 
we recognize and accept them. And, at the same time, we cer- 
tainly have it in our power to render our Heraldry both dignified 
and useful. We can adjust our Heraldry to early usage, as wo 
must build it up upon early principles. We can reject any 
Heraldry that is not true as Heraldry, that does not accord with 
early procodent, and that is not also consistent with existing 
circumstances and associations. We are able to follow the ex- 
ample of the early Heralds, in adhering to sound heraldic rule ; 
in preserving the simplicity which distinguished the best 
Heraldry of tho past; in jealously maintaining the rulo of 
Marshalling ; in adopting a judicious system of Cadency ; and 
in drawing a broad line of distinction between Arms that are 
borne by&lt;right, and therefore have authority, and those which are 
cither copied, or parodied, or improvised in accordance with the 
fancy or the caprice of unauthorized individuals. 

In blazoning heraldic devices which in a peculiar sense are 
of an historical character, it is important that true Coats of Anus 
should be clearly distinguished from Badges ; and, except under 
very special circumstances, it would be well to avoid charging 



Digitized by Google 



MODERN HERALDRY. 



441 



Badges upon shields. The general adoption and use of Badges, 
however, as Badges, would be altogether consistent and right; 
and particularly whenever it now is customary to use a Crest 
for heraldic decoration, a Badge (which might be tho same 
Charge or Device as tho Crest) might be adopted in Modem 
Heraldry with good effect. I may adduce tho heraldic jewellery, 
now much and deservedly in favour, as an illustration of the 
class of objects in which Badges might supersede Crests. Tho 
simplicity of the early compositions and their heraldic con- 
sistency ought always to be kept in remembrance. These are 
points that may be strongly urged upon all who are desirous to 
advocate the worthiness of Modern Heraldry. All pictorial 
Heraldry, with the whole order of compositions that aspire to 
comprise within the limits of a single Shield both tho greatest 
possible variety and the greatest possible number of Charges, 
must be resolutely excluded from our Heraldry. The historical 
value of the Heraldry of the new Palace at Westminster is most 
seriously prejudiced by tho injudicious association of true 
Shields of Arms with other Shields charged with devices, the 
aim and purpose of which I am not able to conjecture, but which 
certainly have no title to appear where they have been dis- 
played. The Peerage will supply illustrations of the style of 
composition that happily is passing away, but which must still 
be regarded as in some degree illustrative of modern Heraldry ; 
two examples of this class will be sufficient to act as warnings. 
The Anns granted to Horatio, Viscount Nelson, are blazoned 
in Sir Bernard Burke's Peerage after the following fashion : Or, 
a cross Jleurie sa. a bend gu., surmounted by another engrailed of the 
field, charged with three bombs, fired, ppr. ; on a chief, (of honourable 
augmentation), undulated arg., waves of the sea, from which a palm- 
tree issuant, between a disabled ship on the dexter, and a battery in 
ruins on the sinister, all ppr. Crests : on tlie dexter, (as a Crest of 
Honourable Augmentation), or, the chelengk, or plume of triumph, 
present&amp;l to Horatio, Viscount Nelson, by the Grand Signior or Sultan, 



Digitized by Google 



442 



MODERN HERALDRY. 



Selim III. ; and on the sinister, (the family Crest), on a wreath of 
the colours, upon waves of the sea tlie stem of a Spanish man-of-war, 
all ppr., thereon inscribed, " San Joseff." The sailor and the lion 
which form the Supporters are not so bad; but what ideas of 
Heraldry could have been entertained by those who devised the 
Nelson Crest, and placed " waves of the sea " and the stern of a 
Spanish line-of-battle ship upon a Helm? The Arms granted to 
General, Sir Edward Kerrison, which are thus blazoned, require 
no comment whatever : Or., a pile az., charged with three gallraps 
of the field : the augmentation following, on a . chief embattled erm., 
a wreath of laurel, encircling a sword erect ppr., pommel and hilt 
gold, between on the dexter, pendent from a ribbon gu., fimbriated of 
the second, a representation of the gold medal presented to Sir Edward • 
for his services at the battle of Orthes, beneath it the word " Orthes" 
in letters sa. ; and on the sinister, pendent from a like ribbon, a repre- 
sentation of the silver medal presented to him in commemoration of his 
services at the battle of Waterloo, beneath it the word " Waterloo," in 
letters also sa. 

Mr. Seton (Scottish Heraldry, p. 134), has treated the " Heraldic 
Debasement " of modern times after a fashion which must rejoice 
the heart of every true Herald. Had my space permitted, I 
would gladly have quoted from his pages at considerable length 
upon this matter, so cordially do I sympathize with his indig- 
nant vindication of the 44 noble science : M T must be content, 
however, to borrow from him a single specimen of the 44 fright- 
ful perversions " which he lashes with just severity. 44 The 
following Arms, granted in 1760, to the family of Tetlow, 
seated at Haughton in Lancashire," says Mr. Seton, 44 are as- 
suredly a delightful specimen: Azure, on a fess argent, five 
musical lines sable, (hereon a rose gules, between two escallops 
of the last ; in chief, a nag's head erased of the second, between 
two crosslets or ; in base a harp of the last. Crest : on a wreath, 
a book erect gules, clasped and ornamented or, thereon a silver 
penny, on which is written the Lord's Prayer ; on the top of the 



Digitized by Google 



MODERN HERALDRY. 443 

book a dove proper, in its beak a crow-quill sable. Motto : 
"Prcemium virtutis Honor!" It appears that the hero par excel- 
lence of the family once accomplished some such an achievement 
in penmanship, as is indicated in this Tetlow Crest. 

The Augmentations of Honour that grace the Shields of the 
two great military Dukes, Wellington and Marlborough, are 
such as the old Heralds would have devised. The Insignia of 
the United Kingdom, and a Shield of France charged upon 
another bearing the Cross of St. George, when blazoned in 
pretenco on tho honour point by the two Dukes, are as signifi- 
cant and expressive as the Howard Shield of the days of Flodden, 
or as the quartered Shiold of Edward III. himself; see Nos. 
613, 614, 615, and also 286. In tho first and fourth quarters 
the Duke of Marlboroogh marshals the Arms granted to the 
first Duke of his name, Churchill, and here the Cross of St. 
George appears on a canton ; see pages 435 and 439. 

In modern Heraldry Cadency is but little used, since its 
operation is almost superseded by the simple process of assuming 
arms without any shadow of claim to them, beyond such claim 
as is supposed to exist through the fact of bearing a particular 
name. In early Heraldry distinctions wore carefully marked in 
tho arms borne by members of the same family, who had in 
common tho same name. Now, on the contrary, when a person 
determines to have 11 arms," ho looks out his own name in an 
armory, and the arms he chances to find assigned to some one 
having the same name he forthwith assumes and uses as his own. 
Or he may obtain assistance, and his own consciousness of 
heraldic inexperience may be satisfactorily set at rest by gentle- 
men who, for a consideration, and a very trifling consideration 
too, find arms for hesitating aspirants to heraldic honours. The 
value of "arms" that are " found " on payment of certain 
shillings, under the guidance of a surname correctly spelt and 
legibly written, is precisely the same as the value of those which 
Messrs. A, B, and C may so easily find for themselves ; or, if 



444 



MOUERN HKRALURY. 



they should happen to bo of an imaginative turn of mind, which 
they may amuse their loisure by devising on their own account. 

It is indeed true that every one is at liberty to call anything 
whatever his "arms," as he may determine either the colour and 
fashion of his costume, or the shape of his house ; but, neverthe- 
less, the Horalds' College still exists, and is the fountain head of 
true Heraldry ; and, until it is true to itself, Modern Heraldry 
must continue to be but a degenerate representative of what 
Heraldry was about half a thousand years ago, when the mar- 
riage of a Prince of Wales was an event that for the first time 
took place in Eugland. 

There is one occasion on which in our own times a public 
display of heraldic blazonry is expected, and when accordingly 
such a display is regularly made. I refer to the practice of 
placing Hatchments upon the residences that had been occupied 
by personages of eminence and distinction, at the time of their 
decease. The rules that have been adopted for the composition 
of these Hatchments I have described at page 108. I now 
advert to these funereal displays, because so very generally they 
aro both conceived and executed in the worst possible taste, 
and in a style that might bo supposed to aim at demonstrating 
the impossibility of any allianco botween Art and Heraldry. 
Probably the actual shield that is charged upon any hatch- 
ment may be heraldically correct in its marshalling, and also 
in its blazonry ; the favourite accessories, however, of these 
shields, with rare exceptions, are such as the early Horalds 
would have regarded with indignant surprise. Shields hideous 
in outline, and rendered still more offensive by what I suppose 
is intended to be accepted as ornamentation, the most execrable 
scroll-work, with ribbons as bad in their own way and, to crown 
the whole, those painful winged infantine heads that aro at once 
so absurd and so offensive, but too commonly aro the charac- 
teristics of modern hatchmont-painting. T have engraved an 
average specimen, No. 616, because I have felt unable in un- 



Digitized by Google 



MODERN HERALDRY. 



445 



assisted words to do full justice to these outrages upon Heraldry. 
May I venture to hope for support from all who love the Herald's 
Art, when I claim for Modern Heraldry immunity from such 
systematic efforts to render it contemptible? Dignified hatch- 




No. 616.— Hatchment. 



The Middlo of the Nineteenth Century. — Abatement of Heraldry. 

ments may be produced with ease by any true Herald ; and 
without doubt the services of a true Herald may always be 
secured, when the production of a really dignified composition 
of this class may be required. 

And so also in all other matters connected with the practical 
working of Heraldry in our own times, we now are fully com- 
petent to emulate the example bequeathed to us from "the 
brave days of old." We have already learned to form a just 
estimate of both heraldic debasement and heraldic dignity, and 
a better feeling for a true and a noble Heraldry is beginning 



446 



MODERN HERALDRY. 



to prevail. Heraldry is popular too; and, accordingly, I am 
sufficiently sanguine to look for such an heraldic revival, as will 
causo Modern Heraldry and good Horaldry to become inter- 
changeable terms. (See Chap. XXX.) 

As examples of very recent Grants of Arms, which have 
passed through my own hands from the Heralds' College on their 
way eastwards, I have added to my Illustrations the Armorial 
Insignia now borne by authority by two subjects of Her Majesty, 
who aro natives of India, both of them men of wealth and 
influence and also of munificent liberality, magistrates, and 
fellows of the University of Bombay. These arms, with those 
of a third native gentleman of India, in every respect equally 
worthy, as a British subject, to bear Armorial Insignia, I 
now describe. I must add that in their religion these gen- 
tlemen, to use the expression used by themselves, are Zoroas- 
trians. 

Mr. Munguldass Xutiioobhoy, of Girgaum House, Bombay, is a 
banker in that city : he bears, — arg. f environed by two sickles inter- 
laced, a garb of ripe rice all ppr. ; on a chief indented az., between two 
bezants, a mullet or : Crest, — on a mound vert an elephant statant, 
holding in his trunk a pahn-braneh all ppr., charged on his side with 
two mullets in fesse or : Motto,—" Wisdom above Riches;" No. 723, 
p. 432. 

Mr. Cowasjee Jehaxghier, of Bombay, bears, — az., within an 
orle of eight mullets, the sun in splendour or; on a canton org., tJie 
rose of England and the lotus of India in salt ire ppr.: Crest,— on a 
mound vert., a low pillar, the base and capital masoned, flames of fire 
issuing iJierefrom : Mottoes, — " My Life is His who gave it," and 
above the Crest, "Burning I shine No. 724. 

Mr. Curzetjee Fukdoonjuier PaRUK, of Bombay, bears,— arg., 
a chevron gu., between three ancient galleys sa. ; on a chief az., between 
two estoiles, the sun in splendour or : Crest, — on a mound vert, a winged 
lion pjssant or, charged on the shoulder with cm estoile az., and behind 
him a palm-tree ppr. : Motto, — " A good Conscience is a sure Defence.' 



Digitized by Google 



MODERN HERALDRY. 



417 



These ancient galloys and the winged lion refer to the early 
migration of the Parsees of India from Persia, as tho rice-garb 
and sickles may be supposed to denote the former agricultural 
avocations of the family of the Bombay banker. 




No. 724. — Cowa&amp;jee J En a no 11 int. of Bombay. 



No. 617.— Pommel ot the Sword-hilt of the Black Prince : 
Canterbury Cathedral. 

CHAPTER XXX. 

HERALDIC TREATMENT, DRAWING, AND COLOUR. 

I believe it to be a prevalent misapprehension, either that 
no early Heraldry has any title to bo regarded as an Art, or 
that in its artistic capacity all early Heraldry is alike. The 
student who desires thoroughly to understand the Heraldry of 
the olden time, will speedily discover that very many of tho 
Heralds who flourished some centuries ago were true Artists ; 
nor will he bo long before his attention is attracted to the 
marked differences in heraldic Style and Treatment which dis- 
tinguish the armorial insignia of different periods. In fact, the 
Art of Mediaeval Heraldry attained to its highest excellence, and 
it declined and sunk down to a condition of lowly humility, con- 
temporaneously with the Art of Architecture, and with the 
other Arts of the middle ages. A series of heraldic Seals, 
ranging in their dates from 1300 to 1550, will very clearly 
elucidate this statement. Or an heraldic monument of tho time 
of Edward I., compared with others severally of the eras of 
Edward III., Henry VI., Henry VIII., and Jambs I., will bo 



Digitized by Google 



HKRALMC TREATMENT. 



•l-iy 



equally explicit in illustrating the progress of Heraldic Art. 
And, again, much may bo learned through a comparison con- 
ducted within much narrower limits. Thus, the Brasses to 
Alianore de Bohuh, a.d. 1390, at Westminster, and to Lady 
Tiitoft, a.d. 1440, at Enfield, show how striking is the difference 
in horaldic Art that at that period was produced by the lapse of 
half a century. The two memorials resemble each other vory 
closely even in minute particulars of composition and arrange- 
ment ; and } r et in treatment and in Art-feeling it is scarcely 
possible that any two works of the samo order should exhibit 
more decidedly marked differences. These differences extend to 
the forms of the shields, and their adjustment to the canopies of 
tho two Brasses. In PI. XVII. I have given faithful represen- 
tations of the Tiptoft shields and lions, which may bo compared 
with those in PL XX., and at page 253 ; and the effect of this 
comparison will be confirmed by extending it to the earlier 
shields engraved at pages 61 and 80. 

The study of early Heraldry will enable the student, perhaps 
to his surprise, but certainly to his gratification, to determine 
at least the approximate period of any Shield of Arms, with 
almost as certain accuracy as an archaeological architect is able 
to read dates in chisel-cut mouldings. Tho conventional syetom 
of treatment adopted by tho early horaldic Artists, when care- 
fully considered under the different aspects which it assumed at 
different periods, will also enable us to develop for ourselves 
such a style of heraldic Art as may bo consistent with the 
general condition of Art in our own era, while at tho samo 
time it harmonizes with tho best and most artistio Heraldry of 
the past. 

Tho really important consideration for us is, that our Style 
should be at once our own, and also in itself equally true to Art ami 
to Heraldry. If we assign a due measure of our regard, on the 
ono hand to tho requirements of modern Art, and on the other 
hand to the authority of early Heraldry, wo may confidently 

2 a 



Digitized by Google 



450 



HERALDIC TREATMENT. 



anticipate complete success. Rejecting the idea that the Art of 
all early Heraldry is of equal authority, wo must take as our 
guide only the early Heraldry' of the best and most artistic 
period — that is, before 1450; and having thus determined what 
early Heraldry we may most advantageously study, we shall 
conduct our inquiries in the spirit of Artists, and not as 
imitators merely and copyists. We must aspire higher than 
to succeed in reproducing even the best early heraldic composi- 
tions. 

A certain degree of Conventionalism will be necessary m our 
treatment of all heraldic figures and objects ; but this conven- 
tionalism imposes no restrictions upon our freedom of design, 
and much less does it require a monotonous adherence to any 
particular type. Our Heraldry must repudiate interminable 
repetitions of the same composition or the same device, all 
exactly alike, as if they were cast from a single mould. Nor, 
because our designs must be conventional in some degree, is it 
at all requisite that they should be unnatural. Good drawing 
also must be a condition of our Heraldry ; so that our Lions may 
bo well and artistically drawn, both thoroughly lionish and tho- 
rougldy heraldic, and yet they may decidedly differ from such 
figures of lions as we should expect to find in an illustrated 
treatise on mammalia. The heraldic Lion is certainly the 
sovereign of the animals who take a part in the Herald's compo- 
sitions; and he is also the most difficult to treat. I know no 
early examples superior to those that appear ready to spring out 
of their Shield at Beverley. The Lions of the monuments of 
John of Eltham also, of the Black Trince, and of Edward III., 
arc excellent heraldic lions ; their conventional treatment, how- 
ever, is somewhat exaggerated. We may avoid such exaggeration, 
without either drawing lions as the Heralds of James I. would 
have drawn them, or reproducing the grotesque water-spouting 
felina of the majolica fountain in the 1862 Great Exhibition. 
Those lions dansant disposed of strict naturalism in heraldic 



Digitized by Google 



No. (3(53. 



No. 711. 




No. 712. 

PLATE LXXMI. Chapter xxx., p. 451. 

No. G33.— Shield of Anns of the Ab»&gt;ey of St. Albas, with the Supporters of 

Abbot Thomas Ramkyge. 

No. 711. — Collar of one of the Rani Supporters. 

No. 712. — Head of one of the Ram Supporters. 

From the Monumental Chantry of Abbot Ramkyge, in the Abbey Church, at 
St. Albans ; about a.d. 1500. See also p. 123. 



Digitized by Google 



DRAWING AND COLOUR. 



451 



animals. The Powys lions, Xos. 300 b, 300 c, PI. XVII., and 
364 a, PI. XXIII., dispose in no less peremptory a manner of 
pure conventionalism. 

At the head of this Chapter I have placed a small cut, No. 
617, representing the pommel of the sword-hilt that is sculp- 
tured with the Effigy of the Black Prince at Canterbury, and 
which is charged with a most spirited representation of a lion's 
face, the face of a truo heraldic Lion ; and at p. 340 there is a 
much earlier group of lions' faces, charged upon the shield of an 
effigy of a Knight, at Clehongre in Herefordshire. This is a 
splendid example of the monumental sculpture of the time of 
Edward IL, about a.d. 1320 ; the Shield is barry of six, the 
bars being alternately carved in reliof, and over all on a bend 
are the three lion's faces ; No. 657, p. 370. 

The Rams that Abbot Ramrydge of St. Alban's assumed and 
bore as his Supporters, and which are sculptured again and 
again upon his monumental chantry in his Abbey Church, with 
a freedom and boldness that cannot bo described in terms of 
too decided admiration, may be accepted by modern Heralds as 
examples of heraldic animals, to be studied with thoughtful 
care, and followed with implicit reliance. The originals have 
all suffered in a greater or a lesser degree, some few of them 
having almost escaped the injuries that have very nearly 
destroyed others. In Plate LXXVII. I have represented one 
of the Shields supported by two rams, and ensigncd with a rich 
coronet-like cap, No. 633. The arms are those of tho Abbey of 
St. Aldan, az. t a saltire or. It will be observed that tho sculptor 
has couped tho extremities of the ordinary within the shield, 
and this ho has done in every shield upon tho monument. Some 
of these shields are ensigncd with rich mitres, all of them now 
grievously mutilated ; and in many instances two beautiful 
pastoral staves cross behind the shields in saltire, their shafts 
interpenetrating the mouldings of the panels and tracery. In 
addition to the ram-supporters, rams' heads are several times 

2 o 2 



452 



HERALDIC TREATMENT. 



sculptured amongst the smaller decorations of this beautiful 
memorial. No. 711, like tho rest of the examples from St. Albans, 
carefully sketched from the original by tho engraver himself, 
represents one of these heads; and in No. 712, PI. LXXVIT., 
tho collar, with the letters RYGE, to complete the Abbot's charac- 
teristic rebus, is shown at length. In his great delight in this 
rebus of his, tho Abbot appears to have charged a ram rampant 
upon his paternal shield of arms, as in No. 715, PI. LXXVIII. : 
this same shield is more than once repeated, and sometimes it is 
impaled by tho saltiro of tho Abbey. 

Amongst heraldic birds, the Eagle holds tne same rank that 
the Lion maintains amongst beasts ; and tho early Heralds evi- 
dently delighted to mako thoir Eagles thoroughly heraldic. AVe 
may accept their style of Eagle drawing, while subjecting it 
to some little modification after what Nature has to teach us. 
Nos. 677, C78, PI. LXXVI., shields severally charged with an 
eaglo having a single head and a double-headed eagle, are 
taken from drawings of tho period of Edward I. The Eagle of 
the Emperor, charged in relief upon tho early shield in the 
north choir aisle of Westminster Abbey, is cast in tho same 
mould ; it has a single head, and is not crowned : but at Great 
Yarmouth thero is a similar eagle having two heads. One of 
tho shields that were originally blazoned on the monument of 



No. C77 a. 

Earl William de Valence, No 677 a, places before us an excel 




No. 713. 




PLATE LXXVIII. Chaitek xxx., p. 451, 

Shields of Akms. — The Abbey Chikch ok St. Albas. 
No. 714. - From the Monumental Cluintry of John de Wheathamstedk, 
33rd Abl)ot of St. Alton'*, a.d. 1421-1460. 
Nos. 713, 715.— From the Monumental Chantry of Thomas Kamky^e. 
37th Ablwt of St. Albany a.d. 1484-1524. 

S. e pp. 123, 4.-.1-453. 



Digitized by Google 



DRAWING AND OOIX&gt;UK. 



453 



lent example of the Imperial Eagle having one head only. 
Anothor example, exaggerated in the drawing, but admirably 
sculptured in alabaster, appears upon the monument of Princo 
Edmoxd of Langley, at King's Langley ; No. 078 a, Chap. 
XXXII. Again I refer to the monumental chantry of Abbot 
Ramrydge, at St. Alban's, for a model specimen of both heraldic 
design and heraldic sculpture. The shield bearing the eagle 
displayed, No. 713, PL LXXVIIL, will be sufficient to show 
the artistic feeling of the Horalds who flourished late in the 
Gothic era; nothing can exceed the combined spirit and delicacy 
with which this sovereign of heraldic birds is executed. There 
are several other shields charged with eagles upon this monu- 
ment, in addition to this No. 713 ; one of thorn bears three eagles 
displayed, two and one. The date of Abbot Ramrydge's monument 
is 1524; it is an exception, therefore, and a truly noble one, to 
the style of Heraldry prevalent at its own era. 

Flours de lys of elegant form abound ; I know no better 
examples than thoso upon the monument of Edward III. It is 

* 

always desirable to seek for well drawn and carefully executed 
examples of every Charge, and I commend this matter of 
heraldic Drawing to the careful consideration of s|udt nts of 
Heraldry. As an illustration of the care bestowed by the early 
Heralds upon the treatment of every Charge, I adduce one of 
the clusters of wheat-ears that ho appears to have used as a Badge, 
from tho monument of Abbot John of Wheathamstede, a.d. 14(&gt;0, 
No. 717, p. 457. Upon a frieze of the chantry of this emiment 
ecclesiastic in St. Alban's Abbey, his Motto, (a robus, like his 
badge,) is repeated, tho Badge alternating with tho words, valles 
abovndabunt. One of the shields upon tho south side of this 
very interesting piece of monumental architecture is charged 
with three crowns, two and one; I engrave this Shield, No. 714, 
PL LXXVIIL, as a very beautiful early example of crowns 
having their circlets heightened with alternate crosses paths and 
fleurs de lys. Having mentioned Abbot John, I may add that in 



Digitized by Google 



45-4 



HERALDIC TREATMENT 



the Church of Whcathamstead, near St. A 1 ban's, the Brass to the 
fathor and mother of the Abbot is preserved ; it has their arms, 
those of his mother, who was a Heyworth, being arg., three bats 
with wings extended sa. 

I must again refer to the white harts of Richard II., in West- 
minster Hall, as models for the treatment of animals of every 
kind in Heraldry (see p. 263) ; and, with them, to the admirably 
sculptured Supporters of the Shields in King's College Chapel, 
Cambridge. 

The practice of tho early heraldic artists even in representing 

ermine-spots we may study with decided 
advantage: in No. 721, I give two exam- 
ples of ermine-spots from early shields: 
a, from one of tho smaller enamelled 
shields on the Monument of Edward III., 
and n, from the effigy of Sir Robert du 
Bois, temp. Edw. I, at Fersfield, Norfolk. 
a. B« In our drawing of Helms and Shields, 





No. 721. 8mce we no i on g er derive our ideas of 

Early Ermine-spots. 

such objects from examples of them that 
are in actual uso by ourselves, wo aro at liberty to select such 
varieties as may be most appropriate to the purposes for which 
wo require them, and also those that are most pleasing in their 
forms. I have engraved several good and effective varieties of 
shields at pp. 13, 15, 61, and 230; the example which follows, 
No. 716, charged with the saltiro of Sr. Alb an, is from the 
interior of the chantry chapel of Abbot Ramrydge. A somewhat 
similar Shield has been engraved at p. 230 : and I may refer to 
another of the same class above the monument to Sir John 
Spencer at Great Brigton. The unsightly and inconvenient 
Lozenge, I think, might be superseded in our Heraldry. Sim- 
plicity in Helms and Mantlings appears to be most desirable ; and 
Helms certainly may always be advantageously set in profile. 
Two fine examples of early Helms are represented in PI. XLVI., 



Digitized by Google 



455 



DRAWING AND COLOUR. 



Nos. 611, 612, the former from the monument of the Black 
Prince, and the latter from the Stall-Plate of Ralph, Lord 




No. 71G. 



Basset ; and with them may be associated, as a model heraldic 
helm, No. 264, p. 110. 

The Label that has its points formed after the early manner, 
as I have invariably drawn it, appears to be preforable to the 
later form in which the ends of the points or pendants are made 
to expand ; it i« also always productive of a good effect that the 
Label itself should traverse the entire field of the shield from 
dexter to sinister. Modern Labels are generally couped at both 
extremities, and their points are distorted into a species of 
dove-tailing. In No. 618 I give three varieties 
of the points of Labels : the first, A, is the — | i | | — 



In many early quartered shields the Quarter- No 618 
ings are not indicated by any dividing lines, 
as in No. 486, p. 253 ; this is cortainly an error, which we shall 
do well to avoid. 



early type ; the second, B, represents the lorm 
of the label introduced in tho beginning of the 
sixteenth century ; and the third, C, is tho 
more modern form, which is altogether objec- 
tionable. 






Digitized by Google 



456 



HKHALDIC TREATMENT. 



. I here refer with cordial satisfaction to two works, both of 
them rich in illustrations, which exemplify in a truly happy 
manner such Treatment and Drawing as students of Heraldry 
may accept with confidence. Again I direct attention to a 
volume, already more than once quoted — Mr. Moule's Heraldry 
of Fish, published in 1842 by Van Voorst. The wood-cuts, 205 
in number, aro engraved with singidar feeling and effectiveness, 
the drawings themselves having all been made on the wood, as 
ho tells us, " under the Author's own inspection, by his daughter, 
Sophia Barbara Moule;" and of these drawings it may bo 
affirmed that they possess every quality of genuine excellence 
and appropriate beauty. The other Work, which also is illus- 
trated in the truo heraldic spirit, is Mr. Seton's Heraldry of Scot- 
land. By way of contrast^ Students may turn from the illustra- 
tions of Moule and Seton to those that have just appeared with 
Anecdotes of Heraldry, a little volume that would have been 
really useful, had it not been as destitute of arrangement as it 
is of indexes, whilo it contains a numerous collection of engraved 
examples, all of them treated and drawn in exact conformity 
with the heraldic feeling and spirit that I have endeavoured to 
illustrate in the Hatchment, No. 616, p. 445. 

In the disposition and arrangement of Charges, and in the 
laws of Tincturing, the usage of the early Heralds may be accepted 
as our best guide. Perhaps we may enrich our compositions 
with less cautious and sparing hands than they did ; and cer- 
tainly we may emulate their system of Diapering both in surface- 
carving and in colour. Colours have been produced for us by 
the chemical science and the mechanical skill of our times, far 
superior both in hue and in variety of tint to anything that was 
known to the Heralds of the middlo ages. It will be well for 
us to avail ourselves of our advantages, and to introduce into our 
blazon the most brilliant and lustrous colours. 

With the special view to provide for students of Heraldry 
and amateur heraldic artists the very best mai&amp;iel for their use, 
I have suggested the preparation of a box of heraldic gold and 

Digitized by Google 



HERALDIC COLOURING. 



457 



colours, with drawing implements, that may satisfy their most 
fastidious requirements ; and my suggestions have been carried 
into effect by Messrs. Winsor and Newton, of Rathbone Place, my 
original publishers, in a manner that leaves nothing to bo 
desired. I may add that the same materials are equally adapted 
for the use of professional Heralds, and of the artists who work 
under thoir immediate direction. 




No. 717.— Badge of Abbot John de Wiieathamstede, St. Alban's 
Abbey, a.i&gt;. 1440. See p. 453. 



Digitized by Google 



No. G67. No. 668. 

Shields from early Seals of De Nevilles. Se&lt;«|&gt;. 404. 



CHAPTER XXXI. 

EXAMPLES OF SHIELDS OF ARMS. 

In this Chapter I place before students of Heraldry the blazon 
of a series of Shields of Arms, the greater number of them in 
addition to those that havo been already described. The series 
comprehends the Arms of various historical Personages, together 
with those of several Families of eminence amongst ourselves at 
the present day. 

From the Roll of Henry III. : 

Biood, Earl of Norfolk : or, a cross gu. ; No. 689, PI. LXXI. 

Fi rz Geoffrey : within a bordure rair, quarterly or and gu. 

De L'Isle : or, a lion rampt. gu. 

De Lucy : gu., three hides haurient in /esse arg. 

De Mandevtlle and De Say : quarterly or and gu. 

Le Mareschal : per pale or and vert, a lion rampt. gu. 

De Montfichet : gu., three chevroneU or, a label az. 

De Segrave (Ancient) : sa., three garbs or. 



Digitized by Google 



EXAMPLES OF SHIELDS OF ARMS. 



From the Roll of Edward I. : 
Arragon : or, three pallets gu. 
Chester : az., three garbs or. 

L'Estrange : gu.y two lions pass, in pale arg., within a bordure 
engrailed or ; No. 660, PL LXII. 

From the Roll of Caerlaverock : 

D'Aubiuny : gu., a /esse eng. arg. 

Anthony Bec : gu.,a cross moline (or recerccUe) erm. 

De Carew : or, three lions pass, in pale sa. 

L'Estrange; gu., two lions pass, in pale arg. 

De Leyburne: az., six UonceU, 3, 2, 1, arg. 

Dk Mohun : or, a cross eng. sa. 

De Montault : az., a lion rampt. or. 

De Multon : arg., three bars gu. 

De Percy : or, a lion rampt. az. 

Fitz Roger : quarterly or and gu., a bend sa. 

De Ton i : arg., a maunche gu. 

Le Vavasour : or, a /esse dancette sa. 

Frrz Walter : or, a /esse between two chevrons gu. 

De Willoughby : or, /retle'e sa. 

From the Roll of Edward II. : 

Blount : gu., a /esse between six martlets arg. 

Fauconbero: arg. , a lion rampt. az. 

De la Mere: arg., on a bend sa., three eaglets vert. 

De Montfort : arg., crusilee gu., a lion rampt. az. 

De Montgomery : or, an eagle disp. az. 

Rauf de Mortimer : or, an eagle disp. vert. 

From the Calais Roll of Edward III. : 

Bur wash : or, a Won rampt. queue /ourchee gu. 
De Couci : barry o/ six vair and gu. 

De Holland (Ancient) : az., fleurettee, a lion rampt. guard, arg. ; 
No. 637, PI. LXV. 
• Maltravers: sa., /rettee or. 



Digitized by Google 



4G0 EXAMPLES OF 

Poynwgs : barry of six or and vert, over all a bend gu. 
RadclifPB : org,, a bend eng. sa. 
Talbot: gu., a lion rampt. or : No. 602, PI. 1YKTT 
D'Ufford : m., a cross eng. or. 

Fitz Waryn : quarterly per /esse indented arg. atid gu. 

From the Roll of Richard II. • 
As tele y : az., a cinquefoil erm. pierced. 
Baoot : org., a chevron gu., between three martlets sa. 
Blocn r : barry nebulee of eight or and sa. 

Boteler : az., a bend arg., between six covered cups or : and, gu., a 
/esse counter-commute or and sa., between six crossleis arg. : also, az., 
a chevron between six covered cups or. 

Braybrok : arg., seven mascles, 3, 3, and 1, gu. 

Charleton : or, a lion rampt. sa. 

Manners : or, two bars az., a chie/ gu. 

Rokeby : org., a chevron sa., between three rooks ppr. 

Saint Amand: or,frettee sa., on a chie/ of the last three bezants. 

De la Warre : gu., crusilee fitchee, a lion rampt. or, armed az. 

De Wyloughby : quarterly, 1 and 4, sa., a cross eng. or : 2 and 3, 
gu., a cross moline arg. 

Brandon : barry of ten arg. and gu., a lion rampt or, crowned per 
pale gold and of the second. 

De Creveoeur : or, a cross gu., voided of the field. 

Devereux : arg., a J "esse gu, in chief three iorteaux. 

Dobell, of Sussex : sa., a doe tripping, between three bells arg. 

Dudley : or, a lion rampt. queue fourcUe vert. 

Glendour : paly of eight arg. and gu., over all a lion rampt. sa. 

Astley, Baron Hastings: az., a cinquefoil erm., within a bordure 
eng. or : No. 726. p. 229. 

Hari'UR Crewe, Bart. : arg., a lion rampt., within a bordure eng. 
sa : No. 727, p. 229. 

Moles worth, Bart. : vair, a bordure gu., charged with crossleis or- 
No. 725, p. 229. 



Digitized by Google 



SHIELDS OF ARMS. 



(WAITERS V! IX JCV &amp;XXX1 



ROCREYN. 



F'lTZ SIMON. 



P ' AUIENY 




WARTELL 



PKERE 



HURST HELVE 




HOUR RON 



AVENKL 



TOPCLIFFE 





4*0 A. 



OIIAI'CKR. 



SHAKKSI'KAKE 



GOWKR. 




i'lait- .-A^ 



Digitized by Google 



SHIELDS OF ARMS. 461 

Henlinoton, of Gloucestershire : arg., a label of Jive points az. 

Heron : az., three herons, two and one, arg. ; and " the reverse." 

De Heriz, (afterwards Harris) : az., three hedgehogs (French, 
"herrison") arg.; blazoned on the Shield of an Effigy of the 
period of Edward I. at Gonaldston, Notts. 

Neville (Ancient) : or, frettee gu., on a canton sa. an ancient ship 
gold,— in remembrance, of Gilbert de Neville, William the 
Conqueror's Admiral, No. 725, p. 481. 

Sergeaux, of Cornwall : arg., a saltire between four (or twelve) 
cherries (" cerises ") gu., slipped vert. 

Sydney : or, a pheon az. 

De Toplyefe : (Brass, a.d. 1391, at Topcliff, in Yorkshire,) arg., 
a chevron between three peg-tops sa. ; No 682, PI. LXIX. 
Vernon: arg., frettee sa. 

Chaucer : per pale arg. and gu., a bend counterchanged ; No. 680, 
PI. LXIX. 

Gower: (monument at St. Saviour's, Southwark, a.d. 1408), 
arg., on a chevron az., three leopard's faces or ; No. 681, PI. LXIX. 

Shakespeare, (granted 1546 :) Arms, — or, on a bend sa. a sjwar 
gold : Crest, — a falcon displayed arg., holding in its beak a spear in 
pale or ; No. 679, PI. LXIX. 

Milton : arg., an eagle displayed with two heads gu., beaked and 
member ed sa. 

Scott : quarterly, 1 and 4, or, two mullets in ch*ef, and a cres- 
cent in base, az., within an (trie of the last, for Scott : 2 and 3, or, on 
a bend az., three muscles gold, in the sinister chief point an oval buekle 
erect of the second, for II ali burton. 

Macaulay, Baron Macaulay : gu., within a bordure eng. or, a 
pair of arrows salti re-wise, their points to the base, arg., surmounted by 
two barrulets componee gold and az., bdween as many buckles in pale 
of the second. 

Wellesley, Duke of Wellington: quarterly, 1 and 4, gu., a 
cross arg., between five plates in saltire in each quarter, for Wellesley ; 
2 and 3, or, a lion rampt. gu., ducally gorged for Colley : as an aug- 
mentation, on the honour-point an inescutcheon cltarged with the Union 



EX AMPLKS OF 



Device of Great Britain and Ireland; No. 614, Chap. XXIX. 
(Garter-riate.) 

Spencer Churchill, Duke of Marlborough : quarterly, 1 and 4, 
Churchill, sa., a lion rampt. org., on a canton of the second, a cross 
an.; 2 and 3, Spencer, (No. 107): as an augmentation, on the 
honour-point an inesrutchcon of St. George, charged in pretence with 
another of France Modern ; No. G15, Chap. XXIX. 

Pelham Clinton, Duke of Newcastle: quarterly, 1 and 4, 
Clinton, (No. 400, PI. XXXVII) ; 2 and 3, quarterly, 1 and 4, 
az., three pelicans arg., vulned ppr. ; 2 and 3, gu., two demi-belts teith 
hucMes erect arg., all for Pelham, No. 132 c, p. 436. 

Manners, Duke of Rutland : or, two bars az. ; a chief, quarterly 
of the second and gu., charged in the alternate quarters with two fleurs 
de lys of France, and a lion of England. 

Russell, Duke of Bedford : arg., a lion rampt. gu. ; on a chief sa., 
three escallops of the first. 

Graham, Duke of Montrose: quarterly, 1 and 4, Graham, 
(No. 400, PI. XXVIII); 2 and 3, for the title, Montrose, arg., 
three roses gu., barbed and seeded ppr. 

Campbell, Duke of Argyll: quarterly, 1 and 4, Campbell, 
(No 866, PL XXIV.) ; 2 and 3, for the lordship of Lorn, arg., a 
lymphad sa.. sails furled up, flag and pendants flying gu. 

Granville Leveson Gower, Duke of Sutherland: quarterly, 
1 and 4, Gower, barry of eight arg. and gu., over all a cros* patonce 
sa. : 2 and 3, Leveson, No. 230, p. 70 : in pretence, the shield of the 
ancient Earls of Sutherland, ensigned with the Earls Coronet, 
bearing gu., within a bordure or charged with a tressure of Scotland, 
three mullets gold. The Duke of Sutherland also quarters Gran- 
ville, gu., three clarions or : Egerton, arg., a lion rampt. gu., between 
three pheons sa : Stanley, No. 205 a, PL XIV. : Brandon : Clif- 
ford, No. 373, PL XXV. : Strange or L'Estranoe, without the 
bordure, and the Royal Arms of the Tudors. 

Fitz-Gerald, Duke of Leinster : arg., a saltire gu., being the 
armorial insignia of St. Patrick. 

ScoTr, Earl of Eldon : arg., between hoo lion's heads erased gu., 



Digitized by Google 



SHIELDS OF ARMS. 



463 



an anchor erect sa. ; on a chief tcary az., a portcullis or, a mullet for 
difference. 

Erskine : arg., a pale sa. 

Stuart : or, within a trcssure of Scotland, a fesse chequee arg. and 
az.; Xo. 620, Pi LII. 

Stuart of Bonhill : Stuart, the fesse surmounted by a bend gu., 
cliarged with three buckles gold. 

Stuart of Davingstone: or, within a bordure eng. gu., a fesse 
chequee arg. and az. 

LlNtt6AY : gu., a fesse chequee arg. and az. 

Vitt : sa., a fesse chequee arg. and az., between three bezants. 
This shield alludes to the official connection of the Pitt family 
with the Exchequer, as the same fesse was borne by the Stuarts 
in allusion to the chequered board of the High Stewards of 
Scotland. 

Seton : or, within a tressure of Scotland, three crescents gu. ; No. 
625, PL LII. 

Hepburn : gu., on a chevron arg. a rose between two lioncels rampt. 
of the field. 




No. 700. — Shield from an 
early Seal of St. Joun ; 
see p. 405. 



No. 701. — Shield from an early 
Seal of St. John, of Sussex ; 
see p. 405. 



Digitized by Google 



No. 678 a. — The Emperor : Monument at King's Langloy, a.d. 1402. 

See pages 390 and 453. 



CHAPTER XXXII. 

FOREIGN HERALDRY. 

Foreign Heraldry differs chiefly from the Heraldry of our 
own Country in being less sovore in its prevailing style, and 
less exact in its details and usages, but more elaborate and 
gorgeous in both the character and the treatment of its compo- 
sitions. The Heraldry of Germany, in particular, is very 
splendid; and, in accordance with the German sentiment of 
modern times, it indulges in an almost infinite variety of subor- 
dinate details, elaborate combinations, and subtle distinctions. 
The Heraldry of France also is rich, and often fanciful, and yet 
almost always eminently artistic. I have already given, in 
tho preceding chapters, the blazon of a numerous series of foreign 
Shields, all of them in some degree associated with tho Armory 
of England ; so that in this present Chapter it remains for me to 
do little more than briefly to notice some characteristic usages of 



Digitized by Google 



FOREIGN HERALDRY. 



4G/i 



Foreign Heraldry, and to blazon a few othor examples to which 
reference has not yet been made. 

In Foreign Heraldry a free use is made of Shields of Arms for 
the purpose of decoration, whereas this use of heraldic decorativo 
accessories is rare in England. Thus, there are small Shields of 
his Arms semee over the bardings of the charger of John, King 
of Bohemia, who fell at Cresci (in his Seal) ; and the King him- 
self has as his Crest the two wings of a vulture, spread and of 
very large dimensions. The Effigy of Earl Wm. dk Valence is 
an example of this method of decoration, but it is the work of a 
foreign artist. 

The Shield which is represented in foreign Military Effigies, 
is almost invariably placed in front of the figure, and in such a 
position that its baso is raised but little above the ground ; with 
one hand the Knight supports the Shield, while with his other 
hand he generally either grasps his Sword or holds his crested 
Helm. 

Foreign Horalds regard with comparative indifference the 
number of the repetitions of any repeated Charge ; and they also 
are generally content to adjust the arrangement of their Charges, 
except in the case of the Ordinaries and other principal Charges, to 
the form of their Shield and the space at their disposal. In 
foreign Shields of Arms metal is occasionally found charged on 
metal, and colour upon colour : thus tho Arms of the Spanish 
Inquisition are, aa., a cross vert. Tho Fronch Heralds indicate 
any such blazon by tho term cousu or cousuc : and such arms are 
distinguished as 44 armes pour enquerir" such, that is, as will ex- 
cite inquiry into the causes which led to this deviation from the 
prevailing rule. In French Heraldry, the Saltier is often couped, 
and it sometimes has its ends floriated. The Cross is sometimes 
couped, and tho other Ordinaries also. When ono Charge rests 
upon any others, as in the instance of a Shield paly of six or and 
az. charged over all with a bend gu., or in any similar case, 
tho French Heralds use the phrase broehant sur Ic tout ; they also 

2 H 



Digitized by Google 



4f,G 



FOREIGN HERALDRY. 



apply tho term Brisure to any mark of Cadency, and a shiold that 
is in any way differenced is said to be brise. 

Two lions (or other animals) rampant are placed face to face 
by continental Heralds, when two Shields bearing snch Charges 
are impaled; as in No. 722, PL LI I., the Shield of Gueldres. 
In this example the crowned lion faces to tho Sinister because 
of tho impalement; had he been borne alone, this lion would 
"have faced to the Dexter, as a matter of course. This same 
usage is also extended to quartered Shields, in which lions (or 
other animals) rampant appear in the repeated quarters : thus, 
had the two coats that are impaled in No. 722, been quartered, 
the quarterly Shield would have borne tho crowned lion facing 
to the Sinister in the 1st quarter and to tho Dexter in the 4th, 
and the other lion would have faced to the Dexter and to the 
Sinister in tho 2nd and 3rd quarters respectively. In like 
manner, the Arms of Queen Phiuppa of Hainault, No. 337, 
p. 159, in foreign blazon would have the 1st and the 3rd lions 
facing to tho Sinister. The Arms of Wallenstein, Due de Fried- 
land, &amp;c, a characteristic example of the usage under consideration, 
are thus blazoned : quarterly, 1 and 4, or, a lion rampt. crowned az. ; 
2 and 3, az., a lion rampt. or. ; over all, on an escutcheon of pretence 
(or, sometimes, in an oval encircled by a tcreath of laurel), the Arms 
of the Empire : the Crest is, out of a crest-coronet a vol az. and or : 
tho Lambrequins are or and az. M. Booton gives (page 300), 
with a woodcut, an example of two lions passant upon a chief, 
which are face to face : the Shield is that of " Le Sieur de Dam- 
pi erhf," who bears, "de gueides a trois pals de vair, au chef d'or a 
deux Lions affrontes de sable sur le chef" The same feeling, which 
thus expresses itself in tho disposition of lions, &lt;fcc, is apparent 
in the desire generally to have the quarters of a Shield corre- 
spond with one another, and also in a prevailing use of counter- 
changing in tho tinctures of Foreign Heraldry ; and it extends, 
in the Heraldry of Germany, to what may be designated counter- 
charging— the blazoning the samo Charge under reversed condi- 



FOREIGN HERALDRY. 



467 



tions, when it is repeated in Quartering : thus, the German Coat 
of Die Schrotexegger is, quarterly, 1 and 4, or, an eagle diitp. having 
two heads sa. ; 2 and 3, arg., a bend sinister embattled sa. ; this 
bend is counter-charged, — that is, the under side of this bend is 
embattled in one quarter, and the upper side in the other 
quarter. It is also a custom prevalent with the Ueralds of Ger- 
many to devote the Shield itself to the quartered insignia of the 
lordships or territorial possessions of any noble Rouse, while 
they charge upon an inescutcheon, in pretence over these insignia, 
the arms of the Family. 

The old practice of Dimidialion, which appears to have pre- 
vailed much more generally at an early period in the Heraldry 
of the Continent than it ever did in England, is still retained by 
modern Foreign Heralds; so that Dimidiated Shields, and par- 
ticularly such as bear an Eagle, are of common occurrence. In 
many instances, the effects of the dimidiating process are very 
singular and curious. I must be content to adduce a very few 
examples : — 1. Die Brodsorg, at., a fleur de lys arg., dimidiated 
by a Shield arg. : this appears as a Shield per pale az. and arg., 
in the dexter half a fleur de lys of the last dimidiated per pale. 2. 
Die Rustochex of Pomerania, the Shield per pale arg. and sa., 
charged with an Imperial Eagle and a fleur de lys counter-changed in 
their tinctures, dimidiated per pale and conjoined. 3. Morglin, per 
pale arg. and gu., in the dexter half a dimidiated eagle of the second. 
4. Die Tappen, or, a dimidiated eagle to the sinister sa, 5. Vox 
M egg en II El M, harry of six sa. and or, dimidiating or, an eagle disp. 
sa. 6. Sirakia, a Provinco of Poland, or, an eagle disp. and a 
bear rampt., both dimidiated and conjoined in pale, sa., under tlie same 
Crown gold; (Sec also Nos. 327, 328, PI. XV11I.) In the stained 
glass of the Church of St Etienno du Mont, at Paris, are theso two 
remarkable examples of Dimidiation ; — or, a tree eradicated, haring 
a serpent entwined about its stem, all ppr., dimidiating gv., two bar- 
bels embowed and addorsed, — the treo is dimidiated per pale down 
the stem, and one barbel only is seen : again £in a window of a 

2 H 2 



408 



FOREIGN HERALDRY. 



ohapel of tho south aisle), az., a lion rampt. or, a chief gu., dimi- 
diating, or, three hedges in pale vert, out of each as many trees ppr. 
And, onco more, in a miniature in tho Imperial Library at Paris, 
tho Lozengo of Arms of Louise d' Savoie, Duchess d'ANGOUEEME, 
Regent, and mother of Francis I., is dimidiated thus, the two 
Coats boing misplaced, — to the Dexter, Savoy, tho Cross being 
couped ; to the Sinister, France Modern : one half of the Cross, 
which is dimidiated por pale, is shown, with one fleur de lys in 
tho sinister chief and ono half of the fleur do lys in tho base. 
Instances of dimidiated Arms occur on some of the Continental 
postago-stamps ; as in the stamp of Borgedorft, which bears an 
Imperial Eagle and a Castle, both dimidiated and conjoined in 
pale, with a Bugle-horn in base. 

Supporters generally appear in Foreign Heraldry in pairs, both 
figures being alike : a single Supporter also frequently occurs. Tho 
Heralds of Franco distinguish between tho figures of human 
beings, when they act as Supportors, as also those of beings in 
human form, and the figures of animals of every kind, the former 
being entitled " les tenants" and the latter M les suppc&gt;rts and 
further, to trees and other objects from which Shields may bo 
suspended, they have given tho name of 44 les soutiens." 

The Mantlings or Lambrequins of the Foreign Heralds, as a 
general rule, follow the tinctures (tho principal metal and colour) 
of tho Arms ; and in the case of an impaled or quartered Coat, 
the Lambrequins would vary as the Anns : thus, for tho Coat, 
arg., a cross sa., impaling, gu., a fesse or, the dexter Lambrequins 
would bo sa., doubled arg., and tho sinister gu., doubled or. ; but if 
two Helms were placed above this Shield, the dexter Helm 
would have Lambreqnins of tho first Coat, and the Sinister of tho 
second. Lambrequins armoyees, or charged with the Arms of 
tho Shield, aro also in uso. In the Heraldry of Fish (p. 72), the 
Achievement of Lorraine is engraved with tho Lambrequins 
thus armoyees. 

Cottars of KniulUhood encircle impaled Shields in Foreign 



Digitized by Google 



FOREIGN HERALDRY 



Heraldry ; and, when thore aro two shields accolees, a Collar 
may encircle them both, and a singlo Coronet may ensign thorn 
both. Seo p. 168. 

The Label, which occurs in Foreign Shields, in several in- 
stances as a sole Charge, varies, in the number of its points, from 
a singlo point to six ; and it constantly appears in blazon as a 
Charge with other Charges. Thus, the Spanish family of 
Bkrenguer bears, quarterly, 1 and 4 ,or, a label of one point az. : 
2 and 3, arg., a tower gu., the port or : the family of Chignin, of 
Savoy, bears, gu., a chevron arg., charged with six ermine spots sa., in 
chief a label of &lt;w many points of the last. The Arms of Dik 
Westfhalen, of Saxony, arc, arg., a fessc gu., in chief a label of 
five points sa. ; and a similar label ensigns the Crost. The Amis 
of Die Brambach are, arg., a bend sin. gu., in chief a label of three 
points az. in bend : and those of Von Mondet, of Burgundy, are, 
az., an ostrich-feather erect arg., in chief two labels of three points in 
pale or. And again, tho Anns of Maussabre, of Touraino, are 
az., a label in chief or : and those of Du Eozon, of Bretagne, gu., a 
label arg. 

FRANCE. France Ancient,— a*., sem&amp;e de lys or: Franck 
Modern, — az., three fleurs de lys, two and one, or. 

In our own times tho Anns of Franck have undergone a 
complete change ; so that tho woll-known heraldic term France 
Modern has become as completely historical as France Ancient, 
having, in its turn, boon superseded by France Present. The 
Golden Eagle of tho Emperor Natoleon, sitting calmly vigilant 
in an azure field, has succeeded to the Fleurs de Lys of gold that 
for so many centuries were identified with the Heraldry of 
France. Tho English Lions, accordingly, havo survived their 
French rivals and associates, unchanged in their blazonry ; and, 
still as of old, representing tho Koyal Dignity and the Realm of 
England, they are imssant guanlant in the front of the Heraldry 
of Europe. 



470 FOREIGN HERALDRY. 

The Shield of the French Empire is thus blazoned — az., an 
eagle rising and respecting to the sinister, grasping in bcdh his claws a 
thunder-bolt, aU or ; or, in the words of M. Victor Bouton, " Les 
Napoleons portent: do L'Empire Francais, qui est d'azur, a 
l'aigle a la t£te contournee d'or, tenant un foudre de meme." I 
quote from u Nouveau Traite de Blazon" by M. Bouton, published 
last year by the Brothers Garnier of Paris, — a work of singular 
interest and value, clear, explicit, comprehensive, and profusely 
illustrated, which may claim to bo popular with the Heralds as 
well of England as of France. 

The National Flag of France, " the Tricolour," has its colours 
arranged vertically, the blue being next to the staff, and the 
white in the centre. The Imperial Standard is semke of golden 
bees, and it charges the Eagle of the Empire upon the central 
white division of the field. Before the Great Kevolution, the 
French Flag was white, and it was charged with the national 
Achievement of Arms. Under the First Empire the Great Dig- 
nitaries received as a special augmentation of honour, to be borne 
by thorn all, a chief az., semee of golden bees ; and, in like manner, 
the Dukes of the Empire all bear a chief of their ducal rank — that 
is, a chief gu., semee of mullets org. 

French Royal Cadency. — Unlike our own Princes of Wales, 
the Dauphin of France did not difference his arms with a Label ; 
but he bore France in the 1st and 4th quarters of his Shield, 
quarterly with Dauphiny, or, a dolphin embowed az. The circlet of 
his Coronet was heightened with fleurs de lys, and arched with 
four (or sometimes eight) dolphins. 

The Due d'Orleans : France, a Label of three points org. 

The Due d'Anjou : France, a Bordure gu. 

The Due d'Alencon: France, a Bordure gu., charged with eight plates. 
The Due de Berri : France, a Bordure eng. gu. 
The Comte d'Artois : France, a Label of Castile. 
The Due d'Angouleme : France, a Label arg., on each point a 
crescent gu. 



Digitized by Google 



F0IIK1GN HERALDRY. 471 

The Dukes of Burgundy : France, a Bordure componec arg. and 
. gu. (Coll. Arm., MS. L. xiv.) 

The Crown of HENRY II., King of France, K.G., on his Garter- 
Plate at Windsor, has eight fleurs do lys upon the circlet, and 
another largo fleur do lys rises from the intersection of its eight 
arches. 

AUSTRIA. Arms —Or, an Eagle with two heads disp. sa., crowned 
armed ami membered gu., having an Imperial Crown placed above it in 
the Shield, holding in its dexter claw a Sceptre and a Sword, and in 
the sinister a Mound; charged on the breast with a Shield, tiercde in 
pale: 1. IIapsburgh, or, a lion rampt. gu. : 2. Austria, gu.,afcsse 
arg. : 3. Lorraine, or, on a bend gu,, three eaglets (or aUerions) 
arg. 

Supporters, — Two Grijfins or, winged sa. 

The Shield of Austria is surrounded with the Collars of the 
Austrian Orders of Knighthood, and ensigned with the Imperial 
Crown, No. 620, which is very singular in its form, being cleft 
somewhat after tho manner of a mitre. The Arms of tho Em- 
peror Francis of Austria, K.G., are blazoned at Windsor, on his 
Garter-Plate. 




No. G20.— Imperial Crown of Austriu. 



The Imperial Eagle of Austria claims to bo tho successor to 
the eagle of the German Emperors, which, in its turn, succeeded 



Digitized by Google 



472 



FOREIGN HERALDRY. 



to tho oagle of Ancient Home ; and it still bears the two 
heads, which were significantly symbolical of the Eastern and 
Western Roman Empires, but are not particularly happy in their 
symbolism when associated with the Austrian Kaiser. The 
Imperial shield, as I have shown, was commonly blazoned in 
England ; a characteristic example I have placed at tho head 
of this Chaptor, No. G78 a, from the Plantagenet Monument at 
King's Langloy. 

Tho field of the Imperial Standard of Austria is yellow, with 
an indented border of gold, silver, blue and black, and it dis- 
plays the Eagle of tho Empire. The National Flag is formed of 
three equally wide horizontal divisions, the central one white, 
and the two others red; on tho central division, towards the 
dexter, is a Shield charged as the Flag itself, having also tho Im- 
perial Cypher within a narrow golden border, and ensigned with 
tho Imperial Crown. The Flag of the Merchant Service omits 
tho Shiold and Crown. 

HUNG Alt Y. Arms, — Ou.,four bars arg., impaling, gu., on a mount 
vert, issuing from a ducal Coronet or, a patriarchal Cross arg. The 
Hungarian Crown, or St. Stephen's Crown, is very peculiar in its 
form. Supporters, — Two Angels holding the crown of St. Stephen 
over the shield. Tho National Colours aro red, white and green, 
arranged horizontally, tho green in chief, and tho red in base. 

PRUSSIA. Arms, — Arg., an Eagle ditp. Mk, crowned, armed, mem- 
bered, and having on each wing a trefoil slipped, all or, charged on the 
breast with the Royal Ci/pher r w n crowned, and lidding in the dexter 
claw a sceptre gold ensigned with a similar Eagle, and in the sinister 
claw a mound az. the circle and cross of the third. This shield is 
occasionally charged u|xm an Eagle of Prussia, after the manner 
of the Seal of Richard, Earl of Cornwall, No. 212 c, PI. LXII 
Supporters, — Two savage Men, wreathed, and holding clubs, all ppr. 

Tho Prussian Crown, No. (521, has eight arches, and after tho 
custom prevalent on the Continent it does not enclose any cap. 

The Prussian Eagle is displayed in the National Flag, tho 



Digitized by Google 



FOREIGN HERALDRY. 



473 



naval Ensign having in the dexter chief angle a cross patee an., 
voided of the field. The Royal Standard has the field saute of 
Prussian Eagles. 




No. 621.— The Prussian Crown. 



The Arms of the Princely House of Hohenzollern, are, quar- 
terly arg. and sa. John George, Prince of Hohenzollern, Knight 
of the Golden Fleece, in tho reign of Philip 111., bore, quarterly, 
1 and 4, Hohenzollern ; 2 and 4, Sigma ring en, on a mount vert, 
a stag tripping or ; and, over all, as Hereditary Chamberlain of 
the Empire, gu. y ttco Sceptres in saltire or. 

RUSSIA. The Russian Arms differ from the Austrian in the 
Eagle holding only a Sceptre in its dexter claw, and being 
charged with a shield gu., bearing a figure of St. George 
mounted, and piercing the Dragon. This Shield is encircled 
with tho Collar of the Russian Order of St. Andrew ; and the 
wings of the Eagle are also charged with two groups of small 
Shields representing the Provinces of the Empire. Tho Czar of 
" all tho Russias" considers himself entitled to bear the doublo- 
headed Eagle, as an imaginary successor to the Roman Caesars, 
(see Triers, Einleitung zu der Wapen Kunst, p. 31 2) ; the two heads 
of his Eagle, however, might denote European and Asiatic 
Russia — his Western and Eastern Empires. The Garter-Plates 
of the Czars Alexander I., K.G., and Nicholas, K G., arc at 
Windsor. The Russian Flag has three horizontal divisions, the 
uppermost white, the central blue, and the lowermost red. The 



Digitized by Google 



474 



FOREIGN HERALDRY. 



Naval Flag is white, with a blue diagonal cross ; and this Flag 
is charged in the dexter chief quarter of larger Flags of red, 
white, and blue, for the three Squadrons of tho Russian Navy. 

POLAND. Arms, — 6?u., an eagle disp. arg., crowned or., quar- 
tering Lithuania, — gu., a knight armed cap-a-pie, mounted upon a 
horse arg., caparisoned az., holding in his right hand a sword 
proper, and in the left a shield of the third charged with a cross 
of Lorraine or. Upon this the national Shield, when Poland had 
Kings of her own, the Family Arms of tho roigning Sovereign, 
being the arms of an elected King, were charged on an In- 
oscutcheon in pretence. The German Emperors, when there 
were Emperors of Germany, bore their own Arms after the same 
manner. 

BADEN. Arms, — Or, a bend gu. Supporters, — Two griffins 
reguardant sa., crowned or. 

BAVARIA. Arms, — Paly bendy arg. and az. Supporters, — 
Two lions reguardant queue fourchSe ppr., crowned or. 

BELGIUM. Anns, — Sa., a lion rampt. or, armed and langued gu. 
Supporters, — Two lions or. The Standard is black, yellow, 
and rod ; the colours arranged vertically, the red to the fly, 
and the Arms with the Supporters and Crown are charged on 
the central yellow division. The Ensign is the same without 
tho Arms. 

The Garter-Plate of King Leopold, K.G., bears, sa., a lion 
ramp, facing to the sinister or, charged on his shmdder with a shield, 
quarterly, 1 and 4, England (as borne by George IV., No. 543, 
PI. L1X.), differenced with a label of Jive points arg., on the central 
point a cross gu. ; 2 and 3, Saxony. Each Supporter, a golden 
lion, holds a fringed Banner of Belgium. The motto is "L' Union 
fait la force." 

BRUNSWICK. Arms,— Gu., two lions of England in pale, with 
sixteen quarterings. (See p. 313; also the Garter-Plato of 
Christian, Duke of Brunswick, K.G., a.d. 1624, which quarters, 
1 . Brunswick ; 2. Lunenburgh ; 3. Eberstcin ; 4. Homberg ; 5. Hoja ; 



Digitized by Google 



FOREIGN HERALDRY. 



47o 



G. Lauterberg and Bruchhausen quarterly.) Supporters, — Two 
savages, ureatfted, and holding clubs, ppr. 

DENMAKK. Arms,— Or, semSe of hearts gu., three lions pass, 
guard, in pale az. These are the Arms of Denmark proper, as tho 
Arms of England are the three golden lions on a field gules. 
The national Shield of the Kingdom of Denmark Jias numerous 
quartering8, and it is a characteristic illustration of Foreign 
Heraldry. As it was borne in the time of James I., it has been 
blazoned in Chap. XIX., at p. 310. Frederick II., King of 
Denmark and Norway, the Father of the Queen-Consort of our 
James I., was elected a Knight of the Garter in 1578, and his 
Stall-Plate is at Windsor. Its blazonry is exactly tho same as 
that given at p. 310, except that it has nine in place of ten hearts 
in the fourth quarter; No. 709, PI. LXXV. The Garter-riate of 
Prince George, K.G., the Husband of Queen Anne, (a.d. 1684), 
is charged with the same Arms, the hearts being ten in number. 
In both thoso Shields tho cross is straight, and it is a cross org. 
fimbriated gu., and not a white cross charged upon a red one ; 
this, accordingly, is the cross of the Danish Standard, with a red 
fimbriation to represent the red field of the National Flag itself. 
It will be observed that the Cross of the Order of the Dannebrog is 
now charged upon the Shield of Denmark ; this is a cross patee, 
and the red fimbriation is carried round tho ends of tho cross. 
Ulrick, Duke of Holstein, brother of Anne, the Queen of 
James I., was elected K.G. in 1G05; his Garter-Plate displays a 
shield having fivo quarterings, two in chief, and three in base ; 
they are, 1. Norway; 2, Schleswig ; 3. Hohttein ; 4. Ditzmers ; 
5. Stormerk ; and, in pretence, Delmenhurst and Oldenburgh quar- 
terly; this shield has no cross charged upon it. 

Several changes are apparent in the Shield of Denmark, as it is 
now borne by the Princess of Wales, and as it is marshalled upon 
the Garter-Plate of King Frederick VI., K.G., (a.d. 1822), tho 
nephew of our Gfopge III. These changes have been minutely 
described, and the full blazon of the present Arms given at page 32. r ). 



470 FOKK1GN HERALDRY. 

Tho Supporters of Donmark wero originally two lions ; but at 
no distant period they have been superseded by two savage men, 
wreathed with leaves about their heads and loins, and bearing clubs, 
all ppr. 

The Danish Ensign is red, charged with a white cross, and 
the flag itself is swallow-tailed. In the Standard the cross is 
quadrate, and charged with the complete Royal Achievement, 
the shield being encircled with the Collars of the Orders of the 
Elephant and the Dannebrog. (See " The Family Alliances of 
Denmark and Great Britain" by John Godoh Nichols, F.S.A. ; 
also, the same excellent Essay in the first volume of the 44 Herald 
and Genealogist ** 

GREECE. Arms,— 4*., a cross couped org. Supporters,— Two 
figures of Hercules. Motto, — ATA nil AAOY 12X12 MOY. The 
Flag is blue with a white cross, and this is cantoned on the 
Ensign, which is white with four blue bars. 

HANOVER. Arms,— See page 299, and No. 541, PL XLVII. 
The Hanoverian Ensign resembles the red Ensign of England, 
but the Jack is charged with a white horse courant on the cross, 
which is quadrate. The national colours are yellow and white 
per fesse, the yellow in chief. 




No. 619— Hesse-Darmstadt. 



HESSE-DARMSTADT. Arms,— Az., a lion queue fourchee 
rampt. harry of ten arg. and gu., crowned or, and lidding in his dexter 
paw a sword ppr., hilt and pommel gold ; No. G19. Supporters, — 



Digitized by Google 



FOKKIGN HKHALDRY, 



477 



Two lions queue fotirchce crowned or. The Flag is, per /esse gu. and 
arg. 

IIOLLAND. Arms, — Az., biUeUe'e, a lion rampt., holding in 
his jxiu - * a naked sword and a sheaf of arrows, all or. Supporters, — 
Two lions crowned or. Tho Flag is of red, white, and blue, ar- 
ranged horizontally, the red in chief and the white in the centre. 
Tho Standard has tho Royal Achievement of Arms charged upon 
the white. 

ITALY. Arms, — Gu., a cross org., within a bordure az. Tho 
Standard of grocn, white, and red, arranged vertically, has tho 
Arms ensigned with the Crown on the central whito division ; 
the red is to the fly. 

The Arms of tho House of Savoy are, gu., a cross arg. ; but 
II. Bouton gives, for the Counts of Savoy, gu., a cross arg., within 
a bordure componee or and az. 

PORTUGAL. Arms, -Arg., five escutcheons in cross az., each 
charged with as many plates in salt ire ; the whole within a bordure 
gu., upon which seven castles or. Supporters, — Two dragons ppr., 
winged vert, each holding a Banner of the Anns. (See Garter-Plates 
at Windsor; also Shield at St. Alban's and Seal at the end of 
this Chapter, No. 708.) Tho Standard is red, charged with the 
Arms and Crown ; but the Ensign is per palo bluo and whito, 
similarly charged, the blue being next the staff. 

Tho Counts Palatink of the RHINE. Arms, — Sa., a lion 
rampt. or, crowned gu. 

SAXONY. Arms,— See p. 1G8, and No. 353, p. 314. In the MS. 
Collection of Arms presented to tho College of Arms by Sir 
William Duodalk (MS. LXIV.), tho Shield of Saxony is blazoned, 
harry of six or and sa. M. P&gt;outox gives the blazon of Saxony 
thus : — " Les dues do Saxe, portent : fasce d'or et de sable de huit 
pieces, du cranrelin de siiwple mis en bende sur le tout." The Arms 
are quartered in the second quarter (Tlturingia is in tho first 
quarter) by .John Gisorgk, second Duke of Saxony, KG. (a.i&gt;. 
1008.) upon his Gartor-Plate. In tho German-Gothic Court at 



Digitized by Google 



478 



FOREIGN HERALDRY. 



the Crystal Palace there are some good casts of early Shields of 
the Arms of Saxony. The Supporters of Saxe-Coburq-Gotiia are 
two lions reguardant ppr., crowned or. 

SPAIN'. Amis, — the same as are blazoned for Catherine of 
Arragon, with France Modern (or Anjou) in pretence. See p. 308. 
Supporters,— Two lions or, each holding a Banner quarterly of 
Castile and Leon, with, over all, Anjou. But these are seldom used, 
the rule being that no Supporters should be employed when a 
shield is ensigned with the collar of the Order of the Golden 
Fleece. The Standard bears the Arms displayed over its whole 
area. The Ensign is yellow, interposed between two horizontal 
bars (each of them half its own depth) of red, and it is charged 
towards the dexter with Castile and Leon impaled within a red 
circidar bordure, and ensigned with the Spanish Crown. For 
the blazon of the Arms of Castile and Leon, see page 306 ; see 
also No. 135, PL I.; and "Castile and Leon" in Chap. XXXIII. 

SWEDEN and NORWAY. Arms : Sweden Ancient,— Az., three 
bends sinister wavy arg., over all a lion rampt. or, crowned gu. : Swe- 
den Modern, — Az., three open crowns, two and one, or : Norway, — 
Gu., a lion rampt. or, croicned gold, holding in his paws a Danish 
battle axe ppr., the blade in chief. The present King, as the heir 
and successor of an elected King, charges in pretence upon the 
National Shield the Arms of Vasa,— Tierce in bend az. arg. and gu., 
over all a vase or. ? impaling his own paternal arms of Bern ado tte, 
— Az., over a river in base proper, a bridge, thereon two towers arg., 
in chu'f an eagle crowned, and accosted by seven estoiles or. A Shield 
of Norway appears upon tne ceiling of the nave at St. Alban's : 
and the Shield of Arms of Christian XI., King of Sweden, K.G. 
(a.d. 10C8), is blazoned upon his Garter- Plate at "Windsor. 
Supporters, — Two lions rampt. reguardant crowned or. The 
Flag of Sweden is blue, with a yellow cross ; and that of 
Norway is red- with a blue cross having a white fimbriation. 
These two Flags are combined to form a United Ensign, after 
the manner of our Union Jack; and the United Flag is can- 



Digitized by Google 



FOHKION HERALDRY. 



479 



toned in the National Ensigns, the Standard beiDg also charged 
with the Royal Arras, Crown, and Supporters. 

SWITZERLAND. Arms,— Ou., a Cross humettte org. Each of 
the Cantons has also its own armorial insignia. 

TURKEY. Arms and Flag, — &lt;?«., a Moon decrescent or, and an 
Estoile arg., in /esse. 

WURTEMBURG. Arms,— Or, three Stag's attires in pale sa., 
impaling, for Hohenstaufer, or, three Lions pass, in pale sa., the right 
paw gu. Supporters, — A Lion as in the arms, crowned or ; and a 
Stag ppr. The Flag is crimson and black divided per fesso, the 
crimson in chief. 

The rango of this Treatise does not admit of my extending the 
present Chapter so far, as to comprehend the armorial insignia 
and the flags of the Free Cities and of all the minor States of 
Germany, with those of the several States of both North and 
South America; nor can I here even advert to the barbaric 
Heraldry of the East. « 

The few Foroign Titles of Nobility that are held, either by 
grant or inheritance, by British Subjects, do not convey any 
privilege or precedence in this country. However real in them- 
selves, and whatever the degree of rank they might confer in 
the dominions of the Sovereigns from whom they have been 
derived, they are purely honorary distinctions here, and they 
can be recognized in England only through a special Royal 
Licence from our own Sovereign to that effect. The Arms of 
these Personages, as would be expected, have certain Augmenta- 
tions granted by Foreign Ileralds, or their entire blazonry par- 
takes moro of Foreign than of English heraldic feeling and usage. 
These Arms are appended to our Peerages; so that it will bo 
sufficient for me to remark that the Coronets, with which these 
Shields of Arms are ensigned, differ from the Coronets of our 
own Peers in having no caps, nor is their rank determined 



Digitized by Google 



480 



FOREIGN HERALDRY. 



in accordance with English rulo. The Coronet of a Duke of 
Franco is ensigned with parsley leaves — " feuilles d"ache ;" that of 
a Marquis, with three parsley leaves animating with as many ele, 
voted pearls; and that of a Count, with nine pearls, while a 
Baron has a " bonnet gresle de perles." The German Dukes arch 
their Coronets, and the Counts sometimes slightly elevate their 
numerous pearls. 

Foreign Nobility, while resident in England, as a matter of 
course, enjoy every privilego of thoir rank, and each individual 
bears his own heraldic insignia horo as he would in his nativo 
country. 




No. 708.— Seal of Beatrice of Foirn oai., Countess of Arundel and 
Surrey, femp. HENRY V : Fltzabm and Warramc quarterly, impaling 

Vortuqal, Sec p. 477. 



Digitized by 



Neville Ancient. 
No. 725.— 800 page 461. 



CHAPTER XXXIII. 

SUPPLEMENTARY. 

I. Heraldic Authorities and Treatises on Heraldry. 

Copies only of the earliest Rolls of Arms are known now to 
be in existence. These Rolls contain the armorial bearings 
with the titles of the Sovereign and his Family, and also those 
of the Princes and principal Nobles, Bannerots and Knights 
of his time. 

1. Roll of Henry III. Date, between a.d., 1240-1245. 
The original lost. A copy by Glover, Somerset Herald, with 
the Arms blazoned but not drawn, dated 1586, and presented 
by him to the College of Arms, where it is preserved, bound 
up with other heraldic MSS. in a volume entitled Miscellanea 
Curiosa, L. 14 : this volume was presented to the College by 
Sir William Dugdale, Garter, in 1676. The Roll edited, with 
highly interesting and valuable remarks and an Ordinary of the 
Arms, by Sir Harris Nicholas, in 1829. 

2. Second Roll of Henry 111. Probable date, about 1270. 

2 1 



482 



SUPPLEMENTARY. 



The original lost A copy, with arms (about sevon hundred 
in number) tricked by Charles, Lancaster Herald, in 1607, 
in the British Museum, Harl. MSS., 6589 : about to be published 
in the Archceologia. 

3. Roll of Caerlaverock. Date, 1300. Contemporary copies 
in the British Museum, Cotton MSS., Caligula, A. XVIII; and in 
the College of Arms, MS., No. 27. Copies by Glover in tho 
College of Arms, and in Ulsters Office, Dublin. Translated and 
published with tho original text, with copious and most valuable 
notes, and with wood-cuts of the banners and shields of arms, by 
Sir Harris Nicholas, in 1828: also, "edited from the MS. in 
the British Museum, with a translation and notes, by Thomas 
Wright, Esq., with the coat-armours emblazoned in gold and 
colours," in 1864. 

4. Falkirk Roll of Edward L, a.i&gt;. 1298. Copy in tho British 
Museum, Harl MSS., 6589. 

5. Roll of En ward II. Date between 1308 and 1314. Original 
in tho British Museum, Cation MSS., Caligula, A. XVIII. Pub- 
lished by Sir Harris Nicholas, with a very valuable Ordinary 
of the Roll by Joskph Gwilt, Esq., in 1828. 

6. Dunstable Roll of Edward II., a.d. 1309. Copy in the 
British Museum, Harl MSS., 1309. 

7. Boroughbridge Roll of Edward II., a.d. 1322. Original at 
Oxford. Ashmolean MSS., No. 731. 

8. Roll of Edward III. Date, between 1337 and 1350. Copy 
in the College of Arms, written in 1 562, with some of the coats 
tricked, by Cotgp.ave, Richmond Herald. Edited by Sir Harris 
NicnoLAs, in 1828. 

9. Calais Roll of Edward III., a.d. 1347. Copy, a.d. 1007, in 
the College of Arms. Edited by Mr. Mores. 

10. Roll of Richard II. Date, 1392—1397. Original in 
private possession. Edited, with a Preface, by Mr. Willement, 
in 1834. 

In addition to these, several other early Rolls of Arms are in 



Digitized by Google 



SUPPLEMENTARY. 



48:5 



existence, and some of them are in the possession of private 
individuals. It is to be hoped that these valuable records will 
bo published. 

In those Rolls, the heraldic formula, to " bear arms," oectirs : 
they also contain the titles of the tinctures, and various heraldic 
terms and expressions now in use. Thus, in a Roll of the time of 
Edward III., probably a.d. 1337, there are the following entries :— 

" Brian Fitz-Alan de Bedah parte, barre de goules H d'or de 
viij peces 

" Rauf de Camays parte, d'or ove chief de goules ct trois tur- 
teaux a" argent en le chief: 

" Piers de Routhe port, d'argent ove un chevron de sable et trois 
testes de lou de goules racer." 

The various DISS. Collections preserved at the College of Arms, 
with other similar collections in the British Museum, the 
Bodleian Library at Oxford, and elsewhere, are Heraldic Autho- 
rities of the highest order. Heraldic Authorities of equal rank, 
and possessing the strongest claims upon the attention of all 
students of Heraldry, are the monumental and architectural col- 
lections in Westminster Abbey, St. George's Chapel, and in the 
cathedrals, churches, and collegiate chapels throughout the realm. 

The earliest writer on Heraldry, whose works are of any 
real value to the student, is William Camden, Clarencieux, born 
in 1551, and died in 1623. 

In 1822 was published Moule's Bibliotheca Heraldica, being 
a catalogue of all the works on Heraldry and heraldic subjects 
that had at that time appeared in this country. 

Published works on Heraldry : 

1. Vincent on Brooke's Catalogue of Nobility , 1622. 

2. Dug dale's Baronage, 1675. 

3. Sandford's Genealogical History of England, 1707. 

4. Xksdit's System of Heraldry, 1722. 

5. Gi'iLLiM's Display of Heraldry, 1724. 

2 i 2 



Digitized by Google 



484 



SUPPLEMENTARY. 



&lt;5. Anstis' Register of the Garter, 1724. 

7. Histoire G&amp;nealogique et Chronologique dc la Mai son Royal e tie 
France, 1726. 

8. Armorial General de France, 1768. 

9. Ash mole's Order of the Garter, 1772. 

10. Edmondson's Complete Body of Heraldry, 1780. 
And more recently published, 

11. Rev. Mark Noble's Hutory of the College of Arms. 

12. Bank's Dormant and Extinct Peerages, 

13. Sir Harris Nicholas' Synopsis of the Peerage. 

14. The Historic Peerage of England, by Sir Harris Nicholas, 
edited by Wm. Courthope, Esq., Somerset Herald. 

15. Vicomte De Magny's Nobiliaire Unirersel. 

16. Planches Pursuivant at Arms. 

17. Montagu's Guide to the Study of Heraldry. 

18. Moule's Heraldry of Fish. 

19. Lower's Curiosities of Heraldry. 

20. Willement'8 Regal Heraldry. 

21. Willement's Heraldic Notices of Canterbury Cathedral. 

22. Shirley's Nolile and Gentle Men of England. 

23. Seton's Law and Practice of Heraldry in Scotland. 

24. Bouton's Noveau Traitide Blason. 

25. Papworth's Ordinary of Arms, (in the course of publica- 
tion in Parts, by subscription). 

26. Parker's Dictionary of Heraldry. 

27. Thom's Book of the Court. 

28. Laing's Catalogue of Ancient Scottish Seals. 

29. Burke's Peerage. 

30. Burke's Dormant and Extinct Peerages and Baronetcies; 
Commoners, and Landed Gentry. 

31. Burke's Armory. 

32. The Herald and Genealogist, (serial), edited by John Gough 
Nichols, F.S.A. 

These works form a selected series, and with them may be 



SUPPLEMENTARY. 



485 



associated the Archanlogia ; the Journals of the Archaeological 
Institute and Association, particularly the papers on Heraldic 
subjects in the latter publication by Mr. Planche, and those 
on Seals in the former ; Stothard's Effigies ; Waller's Brasses ; 
the Gentleman's Magazine, and the County Histories, and the 
Wills of Royal and other important personages ; and also that 
most useful of periodicals, Notes and Queries. 

I must add, that the well-known introductory little volume, 
" Clarke's Heraldry" is about to reappear, edited by Mr. Planche : 
and, that a well executed Practical Manual" specially designed 
for the use of heraldic Illuminators, has been very recently pub- 
lished ; it is the conjoint production of Mr. B. F. J. Baigent, and 
Mr. C. J. Russell. 

II. Miscellaneous Addenda. 

L TincturkS) p. 19. The dots and lines by which the Tinc- 
tures of Heraldry are now commonly indicated, are attributed to 
an Italian, Silvestre de Petrasancta, who describes them in his 
**De Symbolis Heroicis" lib. vij., p. 313, Antverpiae, 1634. This 
Symbol ization, however, did not come into general use until the 
18th century. Some such Symbolization may occasionally be 
observed in the engraved shields of Brasses, in anticipation of 
Petrasancta. The colour Purpure appears only on rare occasions 
in early Knglish blazon. In the Caerlaverock Roll, the very 
first Banner, that of Henry de Lacy, Earl of Lincoln, bears 
a lion rampant purpuro on a golden field : — 

'• Bancr out dc un ceudal safrin, 
O on lioun rampant purprin. ' 

In the Roll of Edw. II., the arms of Sir Felip de Lyneshkye 
are, or, an eagle displayed purpure ; and those of Sir Johan de 
Dene, org., a lion rampt. purpure. In the Roll of Edw. III., 
"Mai.emaynfs port d' argent, a unc bend mgreic de purpure"— 
n bend engrailed purpure. In these name Rolls Sir Henry lk 



Digitized by Google 



486 



SUPPLEMENTARY. 



Scrope and Sir Wm. le 8crope both bear their golden bend 
charged with a lion rampt. purpure. 

2. Tho Shield of Earl William de Valence: pages 38 and 186. 
The careful and excellent fac-simile drawing of this beautiful 
example of heraldic champlevi enamel, executed by Mr. Ber- 
rington, ouo of the vergers of Westminster Abbey, the full size 
of the original shield 20£ inches in height, has just been pub- 
lished in chromo-lithography : and the large engraving has been 
produced by Mr. Durlacher, by whom all my own lithographs, 
including tho reduced representation of this same shield (Plate 

* VII.), havo been engraved. I am glad to be enabled thus to 
invite attention to Mr. Bebrington's very fine and valuable work. 

3. Tho arms of Navarre : pages 41 and 306. The true blazon 
of these arms is, gules, a cross, saliire and double orle of chains, all 
linked logetlier, or. The chains are sometimes represented as 
formed of hat solid pieces, (No. 134a, PI. VIII.,) and sometimes 
of open links of rings (Favyne, ii., 1874) : in the arms of Navarre 
blazoned upon the monument of Henry IV. at Canterbury, the 
chains are of flat solid pieces. This singular device is said to 
havo been assumed by Sancho " the Strong," in memory of his 
successful attack upon a Moorish piince, whose arniy was in 
part defended by a barricade of chains : and, say the Spanish 
Historians, 11 because in this battle he burst in the palisado of 
chains, tho King of Navarre took for his arms the chains of gold 
trellised — atravasata — in a blood-red field." 

4. The Fylfot: p. 44. See Notes and Queries, 3rd series, 
v., 458, 524; and vi., 51, '96, 135. This figure appears upon 
the shield-belt of Sir John D'Aubernoun, a.d. 1277; and in the 
Brass to Robert Arthur, at Chartham, a.d. 1454. 

5. The Mullet: pp. 47 and 52. The Mullet not pierced 
certainly appears as a charge before the introduction of spurs 
having rouelles, as in the noble shield of Robert pe Verb at 
Hatfield Broadoak ; so that the statement in p. 47 requires, at 
any rate, to be modified. 



SUPPLEMENTARY. 



487 



6. Aims of the Isle of Man : p. 56. In examples blazoned at 
different periods, the armour of the three conjoined limbs is 
represented iri accordance with the prevalent fashion of the 
defensive equipment: thus in No. 176a, PI. XIV., the armour 
is banded mail; but in the transcript of the Roll of Rich. II., 
written and having the arms blazoned about 1515, the armour 
is plate. The Arms of the Island of Sicily resemble those of the 
Isle of Man, but the limbs are not in armour, and at their point 
of junction there is a human face : these arms appeared on the 
postage-stamps of Sicily, before that island became a part of the 
kingdom of Italy. The device itself, probably having reference 
to the name of the island, Trinacria, is displayed on the ancient 
coins of Sicily. 

7. Blazon of the Lion : p. 57. The early blazon of the Lion 
rampant and the Lion passant guardant is still retained by the 
modern Heralds of France. See Bouton's Nouveau TraitS de 
Blason, p. 305, " Du Lion ei du Leopard:* 

8. The Lions of England : p. 58. The English Lion passant 
guardanl has his head to the dexter. Occasionally upon heraldic 
inlaid paving-tiles, the three Lions of England face to the 
sinister : this is simply the error of the tile-producer, who had 
neglected to reverse the shield on his engraved stamp. Examples 
occur at King's Langley in Hertfordshire, Ilorsted Keynes in 
Sussex, and elsewhere; the King's Langley tiles include the 
shield of Henry the third Earl, and Henry the first Duke of 
Lancaster — England differenced with a bendlet. 

9. Descriptive Terms : p. 77. The heraldic terms and forms of 
expression that occur in the early Rolls of Arms will be found 
to abound in valuable information to the student of Heraldry. 

10. Knights Bannerets and tho Caerlaverock Roll: pp. 93, 
and 287. I gladly refer students to a most interesting notice of 
Mr. Wright's new edition of the Caerlaverock Roll, in the 
Herald and Genealogist, vol. ii., p. 377 ; (the Part published in 
September, 1864). Amongst other corrections in the new Trans- 



Digitized by Google 



488 



SUPPLEMENTARY. 



lation, the expression in the original, 44 banerez" is rendered by 
the now editor " Bannerets" instead of 44 Banners" and thus the 
true horaldic import of the Poem, as a Roll of the Bannerets 
only (and not of the whole even of them), is established. Be- 
sides King Edward himself, tho Roll gives the arms of eighty-six 
Bannerets; the shields of arms also of seventeen Knights are 
added. 

11. Coronets: pp. 94, 101, 104, and 133. The circlets of the 
Coronets of the Peers are incorrectly described as " jewelled :" 
Mr. Courthope has kindly corrected this error, and enabled me 
to record that " no coronets are jewelled, there being a special 
order against any such decoration." I have not been able to 
correct my engraved examples, Nos. 254, 276, 281, 302, 317, 
281 a, and 302 a. It is romarkablo that all early examples of 
Coronets have the circlet enriched with jewels; and modern 
Coronets are almost invariably represented in the same 
manner. 

12. Robes of the Peers: pp. 94, 103, 104, 117, and 133. The 
44 Mantles " of the Peers described in the text, are the Parlia- 
mentary Robes of those noble Lords : the Peers have also crimson 
velvet Robes of Estate, not Parliamentary. 

13. 44 Compartment :" p. 97. In this page, after tho para- 
graph on * 4 Coins" there should have followed a notice of an 
heraldic 44 Compartment" a term ^peculiar to Scottish Heraldry, 
which denotes a 44 kind of carved panel, of no fixed form, placed 
below the escutcheon, bearing the supporters, and usually in- 
scribed with a motto or the name and designation of the owner." 
— Seton, p. 275. 

14. The Eldest Sons of Dukes : p. 103. Whatever the title 
home by the eldest son of any Duke, his rank is always the 
same. 

15. Page 103. A Duke is 44 Most Noble," and not « Most 
Honourable :" a Duchess also is 44 Most Noble" 

16. Esquires: p. 106. There arc no Esquires of the Order of 



Digitized by Google 



SUFI'LKM KNTARY. 



489 



the Garter, nor has the Order ever associated any Esquires with 
the Knights. 

17. The Earl Marshal: pp. 112, 132 and 168. Tho title 
Earl Marshal is strictly heraldic, and altogether distinct 
from the title of that high officer as a Peer of tho Realm: 
thus, as stated in the text, the Duke of Norfolk is the Earl 
Marshal. 

18. Ordinary of Arms: p. 121. I desire to direct the atten- 
tion of Students of Heraldry to an heraldic publication which 
possesses peculiar claims on them: this is Mr. Papwouth's 
" Ordinai-y of Arms" a work which is not known as it ought to 
be, and the value and utility of which it would be difficult to 
estimate too highly. 

10. Marshalling: p. 135. In the seventeenth century the 
marshalling of quartered shields of arms was frequently con- 
ducted on principles that are most difficult to understand : and 
subsequently there are strong reasons for supposing that many 
shields rich in elaborate quarterings, which ought to be copious 
chapters of heraldic History, are in reality worse than worthless 
through the uncertainty or the absolute want of true heraldic 
accuracy in their marshalling. At what period true heraldic 
accuracy ceased to be understood, even by many of those very 
persons who would never hesitate to blazon and carve and 
display shields distinguished only by their false marshalling, 
I am not able to determine : I do know, however, that at the 
present time true marshalling, even in its simplest expressions, 
is altogether disregarded by persons who, while ignoring the 
College of Arms, take it for granted that ignorance of Heraldry 
does not disqualify themselves from marshalling shields of arms. 
Whilo these sheets were passing through the press, 1 myself 
saved a Minister of the Crown from quartering the arms of his men 
wife upon a sculptured shield, in his own mansion : it is un- 
necessary for me to suggest what kind of an heraldic chronicle 
would have been recorded by the designer of this hhield, had ho 



Digitized by Google 



490 



SUPPLEMENTARY. 



been required to marshal on it ten or twelve or more distinct 
yet allied coats of arms. 

20. Arms of Queen Bhilippa of Hainault: p. 159. In the 
wood-cut of this shield of arms, the second and fourth quarters 
ought to have been divided quarterly. 

21. Arms of the Beauchamps : p. 179. The * Rous Roll," pre- 
served in the College of Arms, contains a series of very curious 
differenced shields of the Beauchamps. 

22. Crest-Coronet : p. 2G5. I observe that this term has been 
introduced into their " Practical Manual of Heraldry" by Mr. 
Baigent and Mr. Russell, from my own Volume, but without any 
reference or acknowledgment. 

23. Supporters: pp. 130, 275, 378. The principal Hammer- 
beams of the grand trussed roof of Westminster Hall, as is well 
known, are carved to represent figures of Angels. Each of these 
figures carries — supports — a large shield of the Royal Arms of 
Richard II. ; and a very recent visit to Westminster Hall con- 
vinces me, that I have not duly estimated the influence exercised 
by these Angel-figures with their supported shields in leading to 
the adoption of regular heraldic 4 'Supporters." 

24. Arms of Leon : p. 306 ; also pp. 42, 157, and 388. I have 
blazoned the Lion of Leon gules, because the balance of authority 
so decidedly inclines to gules in preference to purpure. The 
Spaniards themselves also blazon this shield, — " En Escudo plata, 
leon rojo," or, . . . " un leon rampante rojo," — a lion gules. " The 
uncertainty as to the proper tincture of the lion in the Arms of 
Loon has doubtless arisen from the vagueness attending the use 
of the word purpureus or molochinus in the Latin blazon of those 
arms:" See an able paper by the Rev. John Woodward in Notes 
and Queries, third Series, i., 471. It is singular that in the 
quartered shield of Castilo and Leon, on the monument of 
Edward III. at Westminster, the lion of Leon is unquestionably 
tinctured purpure. 

25. The Order of St. Patrick : p. 346. With the restoration 



Digitized by Google 



SUPPLEMENTARY. 491 

of St Patrick's Cathedral in Dublin, a work so happily accom- 
plished through the princely munificence of Mr. Guinness, is to 
be associated a restoration of the Lady Chapel of that Cathedral, 
with the special view of adapting it to the occupation and use of 
the Knights of the Order of St. Patrick. This most interesting 
work is under the direction of the Cathedral architect, Mr. Slater, 
who proposes to carry out his plan in the most complete and 
consistent manner. 

26. Early Scottish Seals : p. 414. All Students of Heraldry 
will be gratified by learning that a Second Series of illustrated 
descriptions of Early Scottish Seals is in the course of preparation 
by Mr. Henry Lainq. The historical and heraldic value of 
Mr. Lainq's First Series of Scottish Seals, and the beauty and 
fidelity of the engraved examples give the best possible assurance 
of the high character which will distinguish a second volume 
by tho same learned and accomplished gentleman. The work 
will be published, by subscription, by Edmonston and Douglas, 
of 88, Princes Street, Edinburgh. 

27. Fictitious Heraldry : p. 443. 41 The Herald and Genea- 
logist" (vol. ii. pp. 262 and 471,) is doing good service in 
exposing the proceedings of 44 Vendors of Fictitious Heraldry." 
Let it not bo forgotten that tho purchasers are far more deserving 
of reprehension than the vendors of this 44 imitative jewelry : M 
would it not be possible to distinguish their purchases by sub- 
jecting them to at least a fourfold tax? 

28. Page 456. To the Examples of satisfactory heraldic en- 
gravings specified in this page, I desire here to add those con- 
tained in Mr. Laino's "Descriptive Catalogue of Ancient Scottish 
Seals" with the small Shields of Arms that so freely illustrate 
the pages of Mr. Shirley's 44 Noble and Gentle Men of Englaivl." 

29. I have not yet been able to discover for whom tho follow- 
ing shield of arms may have been designed,— France Modern awl 
England quarterly, within a bordure of France— the same bordure 
that was borne by Prince John of Elthain with England only : this 



Digitized by Google 



492 SUPPLEMENTARY. 

shield ocoure amongst a series of shields blazoned in colour in 
the MS. collection, to which I have several times referred, 
(Colled. Curtoaa L. xiv.,) and which is preserved in the College of 
Arms, 




No. 582 a.— Monogram n&gt;id Collar of SS of John Baret, Bury St. Edmund's. 

Sco page 337. 



Digitized by Google 



LIST OF PLATES. 



Plate 

I. Shields and Achievement of Arms 

H. Ordinaries — Roundles 

III. Heraldry of the Cross 

IV. Subordinaries — Varied Fields 
V. Shields of Arms 

VI. Shields of Arms 

VII. Enamelled Shield of Earl William de Valence Fr 

VIII. Charges— Inanimate Objects 

IX; Charges — Inanimate Objects 

X. Heraldry of the Lion 

XI. Charges— Animate Beings 

XII. Charges — Animate Beings and Natural Objects 

XIII. Charges— Natural Objects, &amp;c. 

XIV. Shields of Arms .... 

XV. Charges — Inanimate Objects, &amp;c. 
XVI. Ducal Coronets, Basinets, and Crest-Wreaths 

XVII. Effigy of Lady Tiptoft, and Shields of Arms 

XVIII. Marshalling— Dimidiation 

XIX. Marshalling ..... 

XX. Marshalling and Cadency — Arms of De Bohuns 

XXI. Effigy of Earl John de Hastings 

XXII. Marshalling and Cadency— Impalements 

XXITI. Marshalling— Impalements and Quarterings 

XXIV. Marshalling 

XXV. Cadency— Croeslets, Martlets, Ac. 



494 LIST OF PLATES. 



Pf.ATK Tajce 

XXVI. Create 266 

XXVII. Cadency— Crosslete, Escallops, Cinquefoils, Ac. . 176 

XXVIII. Cadency— Mullets, Fleurs-de-lys, &amp;c. . . 184 

XXIX. Pennons, Standards, &amp;c 288 

XXX. Croats and Knote 284 

XXXI. Cadency— Labels of the Plantagenets . . 238 

XXXII. Cadency— Bordures . . . .248 

XXXIII. Cadency— Labels 246 

XXXIV. Cadency— Plantagenet Shields and Labels . . 236 
XXXV. Banners, Standard, Helm, and Sail . . .290 

XXXVI. Royal Cadency, and British Ensigns . . .252 

XXXVII. Cadency— Crosslets, Mullets, Ac. . .183 
XXXVIII. Cadency— Arms of the De Valences, &amp;c. . . 188 

XXXIX. Cadency and Badges— Fleurs-de-lys . . .190 

XL. Cadency— Annulets, Roundles, Cantons, &amp;c. . 196 

XLI. Coronets, and Crests .... 331 

XLII. Crowns .318 

XLIII. Lancastrian Collars, and Insignia of the Garter . 336 

XLIV. Yorkist Collars, and Insignia of the Garter . . 339 

XLV. Cadency, and Helms .... 403 

XLVI. Shields of Arms, Crest, and Victoria Cross . . 365 

XL VII. Shields of Arms, and Royal Badges . . .360 

XLVIII. Cadency— Crosslots, Billets, Martlets, &amp;c. . . 198 

XLIX. Cadency . . . . .211 

L. Cadency— Roundles, &amp;c. . . . . 195 

LI. Cadency— Bordures, and Mantlings . . 214 

LI I. Lozenge and Shields of Arms . . 327 

LIU. Quartered Arms of the Prince of Wales . . 324 

L1V. Insignia of the Garter .... 341 

LV. Insignia of the Thistle . . . .345 

LVI. Insignia of St. Patrick . . .346 

LVII. Insignia of the Bath . . . .348 

LVLU. Royal Arms of England . . . .300 

L1X. Royal Arms of England . .301 

LX. Arms of tho Prince of Wales . .325 

LXI. Insignia of Star of India .... 352 



Digitized by Google 



LIST OF PLATES. '105 



Platk 






LXTT 


V'lUI III J 1 'l.'l 1 (lllto • • • • 


. 216 




Kffiffv of TfAnrv DnlrA nf Tjiti roster 

xjkxigj yji xxtjixxj/ 1 j_»mvo ui xjauicwwi • • 


. 235 


LXIV. 


Pnmnptfl rVffitis nnrl TVrnntlmfra 

vajiviicio, vitom, uiiu miuiiiiugn . • 


. 270 


LXV. 


Arms nf ilin fYm ft '«c/vr nnrl tVto Trnllnnds 

XX 1 1 1 l[j UL U1U V/UlllCi&gt;oOI , HUH lilt.: JIUIIcMXUB • 


247 


LXVI. 


r»nT , tf»r-TMA.tfl TTiimnVirfv Ao T^nlniTi (t 

villi lll-l 11* LCj XX 11 111 11 111 I. &gt; U\J X-H1I1 Lilly AV.VJ. • 


11G 


lxvii. 


KntPlnfl nf Aftnfl 

OlllCiUO Ul X\ 111 1/j t • • * 


175 


LXVI 1 1. 


oiiiciciB oi &gt;\ i in&gt; . . • • 




LX1X. 


oiiicius oi Arms .... 




LXX. 


oCuiS ...... 


409 


LXXI. 


S&gt;]iiiil(lo nf itrms 

i~ MIL HIS Ul -V J II1S .... 


209 


LXXII. 


^liiiiMc nf irrnc 

oiiieius oi .\ mis .... 


°02 


LXXIII. 


*sliii.Uu nf Armc 

OIllL'h IS OI Al Ills .... 




LXXIV. 


SJhwulriH nf Arms 

■ "H iu.s ui .fvriiia .... 


222 


LXXV. 


Arms of Denmark 


. 326 


LXXVI. 


I5.nl cpr itf 


257 


LXXVII. 


/vriiis oi ivoooi iuimrj&gt;go, oi. ahuii s 




LXXVIII. 


Shields of Arms, St. Alban's 


. 453 


LXXIX. 


Slab of Henry IV., from Venice 


. 268 


LXXX. 


Marshalling and Cadency 


. 149 


LXXXI. 


Seals ...... 


. 407 


LXXXII. 


Seals ...... 


. 412 



Digitized by Google 



LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS. 



1 a. ) Jerusalem, p. 8. 
B. /Jerusalem, p. 8. 

2 France Ancient, p. 12. 

8 ) 

* Heraldic Shields p. 13. 



G a. Heraldic Shields, p. 15. 

7 Provence, plate i. 

8 Points of the Shield, p. 17. 

9 Per Pale, p. 17. 

10 Per Fease, p. 17. 

11 Per Cross, or Quarterly, p. 17. 

12 Per Bend, p. 17. 

13 Per Saltire, p. 17. 

14 Per Chevron, p. 17. 

15 Quarterly of eight, p. 17. 
10 Quarterly Quartered, p. 17. 

17 Dividing ami Border Lines, p. 

18 Or, p. 19. 

19 Argent, p. 19. 

20 Azure, p. 19. 

21 Gules, p. 19. 

22 Sable, p. 19. 

23 Vert, p. 19. 

24 Purpura, p. 19. 

25 Ermine, p. 20. 

26 Ermines, p. 20. 

27 Erminois, p. 20. 

28 Vair, p. 20. 

29 Vair, p. 20. 

30 Counter Vair, p. 20. 

31 Potent, p. 20. 

32 Counter Potent, p. 20. 

33 A Chief, plate ii. 
33 a. De Neville, p. 25. 
33 h. De Lacy, p. 25. 
31 A Fease, plate ii. 

35 A Bar, plate ii. 

36 A Pale, plate ii. 

37 A Cross, plate ii. 

38 A Bend, plate ii. 

39 A Saltire, plate ii. 

40 A Chevron, plate ii. 
40 a. DeClare, p. 21. 



No. 

41 A Pile, plate ii. 

42 Two Bars, plate ii. 

43 A Fesse Cotised, plate ii. 

44 Burs Gemelh s, plate ii. 

45 A Pale endorsed, plate ii. 

46 On a Bend, plate ii. 

47 A Bend Cotised, plate ii. 

48 A Ribbon, plate ii. 

49 On a 8altire, plate ii. 
49 a. In Chief, plate ii. 

49 a. In Fesse, plate ii. 
49 c. In Pale, plate ii. 
49 d. In Cross, plate ii. 
49 e. In Bend, plate ii. 
49 r. In Saltire, plate ii. 
49 o. In Chevron, plate ii. 

49 il In Pale, plate ii. 

50 A Bezant, plate ii. 

51 A Plate, plate ii. 

52 A Hurte, plate ii. 

53 A Torteau, plate ii. 

54 A Pellet, plate ii. 

55 A Pomme, plate ii. 

' 56 A Fountain, plate iL 

57 A Greek Cross, plate iii. 

58 A Latin Cross, plate iii. 

59 A Tau Cross, plate iii. 
00 St Andrew, plate iii. 

61 St Patrick, plate iii. 

62 St. George, plate iii. 

63 The First Union Jack, p. 26. 

64 The Second Union Jack, p. 26. 

65 A Cross Fimbriated, plate iii. 

66 A Cross surmounted by a Cross, 

plate iii. 

I 66 a. A Cross voided, plate iii. 

67 A Cross pointed, plate iii. 

68 A Cross patriarchal, plate iii. 

69 A Cross on Degrees, plate iii. 

70 A Cross couped, plate iii. 

71 A Maltese Cross, plate iii. 

72 A Cross quadrate, plate iii. 

73 A Cross quarter pierced, plate iii. 

74 A Cross quarterly piorced, plate 



Digitized by Google 



LIS F OF ILLUSTRATION'S. 4t&gt;7 



No. 

75 A Cross Moline, plate iii. 

76 A Cross Recercelee, plate iii. 

77 A Cross Patonce, plate iii. 

78 The Confessor — St Edward, 

pli\te i. 

70 A Cross Fleurio, plate iii. 

80 A Cross Fleurettee, plate iii. 

81 A Cross Pominee, |)late iii. 

82 A Cross Fourchee, plate iii. 

82 A. A Cross Urdee, p. 30. 

83 A CrwH Crosslct, plate iii. 

84 A Cross Crosslct Fitchee, plate iii. 

85 A Cross Patee, plate iii. 

86 A Cross Pa tee Fitchee, plate iii. 

87 A Cross Botonee, plate iii. 

88 A Cross Botonee Fitche*e, plate 

iii. 

80 A Cross Potent, plate iii. 

00 A Cross Potent Fitchee, plate iii. 

01 A Cross Potent Quadrate, plate 

in. 

02 A Cross Engrailed, plate iii. 

03 A Cross Undec, plate iii. 

04 A Cross Ragule'r, plate iii. 

05 Five Fusils in Cross, plate iii. 

06 A Canton, plate iv. 

07 A Gyron, plate iv. 

08 An Ineseutehoon, plate iv. 
00 Mortimer, p. 31. 

00 a. Mortimer, p. 31. 

100 An Orle, plate iv. 

101 Do Valence, plates v., vii., and 

xxxviii. 

102 A Tressure, plate iv. 

103 Scotland, plate v. 

104 A Lozenge, plate iv. 

105 A Fusil, plate iv. 

106 A Frette, plate iv. 
[06 a. Frettee, plate iv. 

107 IiODe Spencer, plate v. 

108 Flam-lies, plate iv. 
108 a. Flasques, plate iv. 
100 A Masele, plate iv. 

10 A Rustre, plate iv. 

11 A Billet, plate iv. 

12 A Label, plato iv. 

13 A Bordure, plate iv. 

14 A Borduro engrailed, plate iv. 

15 A Bordure indented, plate iv. 

15 a. Shield— Whitworth Effigy, p. 34. 

16 Brittany— I&gt;c Dreux, plate v. 

17 Gyronny, plate iv. 

18 Gyronny of six, plate iv. 
10 Lozengy, plato iv. 

20 Fusilly, plate iv. 

21 De Grey, p. 35. 

21 a. Paly of 8, plate iv. 

21 b. Bendy of 8, plate iv. 

22 Barry Bendy, plate iv. 

23 Paly Bendv, plate iv. 



I No. 

124 A Bordure Coinpony, plate iv. 

125 Bordure Counter Compony, plate 

iv. 

126 Chcquee. plato iv. 

127 Sir Robert de Chandos, plate vi. 
127 a. Percy — Beverley, plate vi. 

127 b. De- Warren ne — Castle Acre, plate 
vi. 

127 c. De Warrenne — Beverley, plate 

vi. 

128 Flag of the Admiralty, p. 30. 
120 Six Annulets, plate viii. 

120 a. Arrows, plate viii. 
120 b. Bannerman, plate viii. 

129 c. Three Battering Hams, plate viii 

130 A Fire Beacon, plate viii. 

131 Breys, plate viii. 

131 a. Do Geneville, plate xiv. 

132 A Buckle, plate viii. 

132 a. A Buckle and Strap, plato viii. 
132 b. Thomas Rocelyn, plate lxix. 

132 c. Pelham, p. 430. 

133 A Caltrop, plate viii. 

133 a. A Chapeau, plate viii. 

134 An Esearbuncle, plate viii. 

134 a. An Escarbuncle, plato viii. 

135 Castile and I^eon — Queen Alia- 

nore, plate i. 

135 a. A Castle, plate viii. 

136 A Chess- Rook, plate viii. 
136 A. A Cinquefoil, plate viii. 
136 u. A Clarion, plate viii. 

136 c. Fitz Simon, plate lxix. 

137 A Clarion, plate viii. 

137 a. Cups, plate viii. 

138 Cushions, plate viii. 

138 a. Cushions— De Bohun Brass, plate 
xv. 

130 CitA- of London, p. 54. 

140 An Estoile, plate viii. 

141 A Winnowing Fan. plate viii. 

142 A Fetter-f/vk, plate viii. 

143 A Fylfot Cross, plate viii. 

144 lVAubeny, plate lxix. 
144 a. Crest of Hope, plate xxvi. 

144 b. Crest of Drake, plato xxvi. 

145 Gauntlets, plate viii. 

146 Gurges, plate viii. 

146 a. John MartelL plate lxix. 

146 b. De Hursthelve, plate lxix. 

147 A Hawk's Lure, plate ix. 

148 A Hawk's Bell and Jesses, plato 

ix. 

149 A Hemp-Brake, plate ix. 

150 A Hunting Horn, plate ix. 

151 A Lymphad, plate ix. 

152 A Maunche, plate ix. 

152 a. A Maunche, plate ix. 

153 A Mill-Rind, plate ix. 
153 a. A Guy Fwre. plate lxix. 

2 K 



Digitized by Google 



408 



LIST OF ILLUSTRATION'S. 



No. 

154 A Mullet, plate ix. 

155 A Mullet of six point*, plate is. 
150 IV Vere, pinto vi. 

157 A Mullet pierced, plate ix. 

158 A Pall, plate ix. 

158 A. John Bourdon, plate Ixix. 

159 A Pastond Stufl, plutc xv. 

100 A Crozier, plate xv. 

101 A Penner und Inkhorn, plate ix. 

102 A Pheon, plate ix. 

103 A Porti'ullis, plate ix. 

10-1 A Quutrefuil uud Shield, plate 
xv. 

104 a. A Scaling-Ladder, p. 5L 

104 b. A Lozenge-Panel and Shield, 

plate xv. 

105 A Seax, olato ix. 

166 A Shakefork, plate ix. 
101 Hay. p. 5_L 

108 The THnity House, plate xiv. 

169 A Pryck-Spur, plate ix. 

170 A Wheel-Spur, plate ix. 

171 A RoueUe-S|»ur, plate ix. 

172 A Guarded-Spur, plate ix. 

173 The Karl Poulett, plate xiv. 
ill a. A Tower, plate ix. 

174 A Trelise, plate ix. 

175 A Tnm»|K't, plate ix. 
170 Water Bmigcts, pluto ix. 
17'? A. Isle of Man, plate xiv. 

177 The Badge of Ulster, plate ix. 
177 a. Douglas, plate xiv. 
118 A Lion Tas.sant, plate x. 
179 A Lion Passant Guardant, plate 
x. 

179 a. A Lion Passant Rcguardant, 
plate x. 

179 il A Lion Passant Guardant, plate 

x. 

180 A Lion Rampant, plate x. 

180 a. A Lion Raiupnnt, plate x. 

181 A Lion Rampant Guardant, plate 

x. 

182 A I. ion Rampant Reguardant, 

plate x. 

183 A Lion Salient, plate x. 

184 Two Lions Combatant, plate x, 

185 Tho Percy Lion, p. 5JL 

186 The Howard Lion, p. 5JL 

187 A Lion Sejunt, plate x. 

187 a. A Lion Sejant Rampant, plate x. 
187 n. A Lion Conchaut, plate x. 
187 c. A Lion Co wan! , p. 51L 
l&amp;ii A Demi-Lion Rampant, plate x. 
182 A Lion's Face, plate x. 
1HQ A Lion's Head, couped, plate x. 
1111 A Lion's Head, erased, plate x. 
1 32 A Lion's Jnml&gt;e, plate x. 
1113. Two Lions Rampant, addoraed, 
plate x. 



(Cornwall, plate v. 

194 &lt;A Lion Rampant, crowned, 
I plate x. 

195 A Lion Rampant, holding a 

Sp*-ar, plate x. 
180 A Lion gorged with a Corouet, 
plate x. 

197 A Lion queue fourchee. plate x. 

198 England, p. 0_L 

199 The Earl of Pembroke, plate x. 

199 a. An Ermine, p. 62. 

200 Longespee, p. 8iL 

201 !&gt;e Rohun, plate xx. 

201 a. De Wheathanihtede, plate xv. 

202 A Stag at gaze, plate xi. 

203 A Stag tripping, plate xi. 
203 A. A Stag at speed, plate xi. 
2(4 A Stag lodged, plate xi. 

205 A Stag's Head eabossed, plate xi. 

205 a. Stanley, plate xiv. 

205 B. Cavendish, plate xiv. 

200 A Rear and Ragged Staff, plate 

XXX. 

207 A Talbot Dog, phite xi. 

208 Jessnnt-de-lys, plate xi. 

208 a. Jessant-de-lys reversed, plate xi. 

209 A Bird soaring, plate xi. 

210 Wings in lure, plate xi. 

211 Wings en ct, plate xi. 

j 212 A Rird trussing another, plate xi. 

212 a. An eagle displayed, plate xi. 

| 212 b. An Eagle with two heads, plate 
xi. 

212 c. Richard, Earl of Cornwall, plate 

Ixii. 

213 A Pelican in its Piety, plate xi. 

214 A Swan chained, plate xi. 

215 A Bird closed, plate xi. 
210 A Martlet, plate xi. 

[ 2Jii a. A Martlet, plate xi. 

2JL7 A Fish nalant, plate xi. 

'ilft A Fish hauriaut, plate xi. 
i 218 a. A Fish uriant, plate xi. 

219 A Dolphiu embowed, plate xi. 

219 a. A Dolphiu, p. 06. 

22Q An Escallop Shell, plate xi. 

221 A Cockatrice, plate xii. 

i 222 Crest— Dagworth, plate xii. 

222 a. Crest — Elmebriggc, plate xii. 

223 A Dragon, plate xii. 

223 a. A Dragon Standard, plate xii. 
' 224 A Griffin, nlate xii. 
I 225 A Mermaid, plate xii. 

225 a. A Collar of Mermaids, p. 08. 

220 A Merman, plate xii. 
1 222 A Wyvem, plate xii. 

221 a. A Unicorn, plate xii. 
227 a. A Pegasus, plate xii. 
221 c. A Phoenix, plate xii. 
227 ii. A Salamander, p. 09. 



y Google 



LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS. 



400 



No. 

228 The Sun in splendour, plnte xii. 
22^ Rays of the Sun, plate xii. 

230 Crescent, plate xii. 

231 Decrescent, plnte xii. 

232 Increscent, plate xii. 

233 A Oinquefoil, plate xii. 

234 Black Prince— Shield of Peace, 

p. 7JL 

234 a. A Feather Badge— Black Prince, 
plate xii. 

234 b. Swan and Feather— Do Bohun, 

plate xii. 

235 Feather and Scroll— Worcester, 

plate xii. 

235 a. Prince of Wales' Plume— Mo- 

dern, plate xv. 
23G A Flcur-de-lys, from tiles, plate 
xiii. 

236 a. A Fleiir-de-lya, from tiles, plate 

xiii. 

236 b. A Fleur-dc-lys, from tiles, plate 

xiii. 

237 A Fleur-de-lya— Windsor, plate 

xv. 

237 a. A Flour do-lys— Monument of 

Edward HI., plate xv. 

238 A Flenrde-lys, on Sword and 

Sceptre, plate xiii. 

238 a. A Seal of Louis VIII., p. 404, 

239 Leveson, p. HL 
239 a. Chester, p. 7J! 
239 b. A (Jarhe, plate xii. 

239 c. A Slip of Oak, plate xii. 

240 Planta Genista, plate xii. 

241 A Rose, plato xiii. 

241 a. A Rose, Pulham Church, p. 7iL 

242 A Rose— Worcester, p. m 

242 a. A White Rose of York, plate xiii. 

243 A Rose-en-Soleil— Worcester, p. 

244 A Sixfoil, plate xiii. 

245 The Stock of a Tree, plate xiii. 
'llu A Trefoil dipped, plate xiii. 
242 A Tudor Rose — Worcester, p. 

233. 

248. A York and Lancastrian Rose 

crowned, plato xiii. 
248 a. A White RoHo-en-Soleil, plate xiii. 
242 Byron, p. TL 

250 (ioutte'e, p. 22. 

251 (Jouttee, p. 22. 

252 Mnntelee, plate xiii. 

253. A 8altire trononee, plate xiii. 

254 The Coronet of a Baron, p. 24, 

255 Canterbury impaling Kempe, 

plate xiv. 

256. Contoise — Aymer de Valence, 
plate xv. 

257 Basinet— Sir IL Calvelry, plate 
xvi. 



So. 

251 a. A Crest Coronet, p. 265. 

258 Basinet — Ralph de Neville, plato 

xvi. 

259 Helm and Crest— Richard L, 

plate xxvi. 
262 Helm and Crest— H. do Bohun, 

plate xxvi. 
261 Helm and Crest— Sir J.Lou trell 

plato xxvi. 
i 262 Helm and Crest— Ed w«rd III., 

plato xxvi. 
1 265 Helm and Crest— Black Prince, 

plate xxvi. 
j 264 Helm and Crest— Edward do 

Thorpe, p. LIU 

265 Helm and Crest— R. de Beau- 

champ, plate xii. 

266 Crest— Lord Stourton, plate 

xxvi. 

261 Helm and Crest— Sir William do 

Bryenne, plate xxvi. 
261 a. Crests-Lord Ferrers of Chartley, 
plate xxvi. 
I 262 b. Two Crests of Tvndall, p. 222. 
j 268. Crest Coronet— Sir T. Bromtlete, 
plate xxvi. 
'JjAI Cie&gt;t of Mortimer, plate xxvi. 

270 Seal— Mortimer, p. 418, 

222 a. Seal— Edm. do Arundel, p. 27_L 

im 

271 St. Edmond. plato xiv. 
212. A Mural Crown, p. 22. 
273 A Naval Crown, p. 22. 
211 A Vallarv Cmwn. p. liiL 

275 An Eastern Crown, p. 22. 

276 The Con.net of a Duko, p. 1QL 
•J77 Basinet — John of Eltham, plato 

xvi. 

&gt; 277 a. Basinet — John of Eltham, plate 
xvi. 

278 Fillet— William of Hatfield, plate 
xvi. 

j 222 Basinet — Black Prince, plato 
xvi. 

222 a. Ba*inet — Black Prince, plate 
xvi. 

222 B. Basinet— Black Prince, p. 122, 

280 Coronet— John de la Polo, plato 

xvi. 

281 The Coronet of an Earl, p. BH. 
2K1 a. Coronet of an Earl, plato Ixiv. 

282 Coronet — Earl of Arundel, p. 1 05. 
283. O nonet— Earl of Arundel, p. 105. 

283 a. Coronet— Countess of Arundel 

plate xii. 

284 Coronet -Countess of Essex, 

plate xii. 

285 Coronet- Sir T. Boloyn, plato 

xlL 

286 Edward III., p. 333. 

2 K 2 



ized by Google 



500 



LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS. 



No. 

887 Camoys — with Garter, plate xiv. 
288 Camoys and Mortimer, plato 
xiv. 

2SS a. Garter— Lord Camoys, plate 
xliiL 

2£2 Henry V.. plate xiv. 

290 Garter — John de la Pole, plate 

xliv. 

291 Yorkist Collar — Lord Harcourt, 

plate xliv. 

222 Garter — Lady Harcourt, plote 

xliv. 

223 A Gonfannon, plate xxix. 

lilil Modern Helm — Sovereign, p. 
110. 

225 Modern Helm — Princes, p. 110- 
29H Modern Helm— Knights, p. LLL 
297 Modern Helm — Esquires, p. LLL 
•21)8 Crown of Herald King-of-Anns, 
p. 352, 

222 The Duke of Norfolk, p. 12S. 
300 Effigy of Lady Tiptoft, plate xvii. 
300 a. Tiptoft, plato xvii. 

300 b. Powys, plate xvii. 

Bflfl c. Tiptoft and Powys, plate xvii. 

301 1 larsyck, plate L 

302 The Coronet of a Marquess, p. 117. 

303 A Merchant's Mark, plate xiii. 
804 The Merchants of the Staple, 

plate xiii. 

305 The Merchants Adventurers, 

plate xiii. 

306 A Mitre, p. 112. 
302 A Mitre, p. 112. 

BOB The Mitre of the Bishop of Dur- 
ham, p. 112. 
302 Three Mitres, p. 211 

310 Pennon — Sir J. D'Auherntran, 

plate xxix. 

311 Shield of St. George, Elsyng 

Brass, plate xxix. 

312 Standard— Edward ILL. plate 

xxix. 

313 Standard — Earl of Warwick, 

plate xxxv. 

314 Standard — Henry of Bolingbroke, 

p, 28G. 

315 Standard — Henry VDX, plate i 

xxix. 

31fi Standard — Henry VIII., plate 
xxix. 

312 The Coronet of a Viscount, p. 
133. 

318 A Crest Wreath, plate xv. 

318 a. A Crest Wreath in perspective, 

plato xv. 

.312 Stafford impaling Butler, plate 
xxiv. 

312 a. Stafford, plate xxiv. 

319 a. Butler, plate xxiv. 



No. 

320 Cornwall dimidiates Clare, plate 
xviii. 

32i! a. Clare dimidiates Fitzgerald, plato 
lxxx. 

::21 Cornwall impales Clare, pla'e 
xviii. 

322 England dimidiates France, plate 

xviii. 

323 France Ancient and Navarre, 

plate xviii. 

324 Dimidiated Shield — Chessman, 

plate xviii. 

325 De Valence dimidiates Clare- 

nionte, plate xviii. 

325 a. Alianore Ferre, plate lxxx. 

326 Great Yarmouth, plate xviii. 
32 Ci a. The Cinque Ports, plato lxxx. 
326. b. Chester City, plate lxxx. 

327 Seal — Alice d'Avesnes, plate 

xviii. 

328 Seal — Peter Tederade, plate 

xviii. 

329 Seal— Joan de Barre, p. 150. 
322 a. De Barre, plate xix. 

322 b. Diagram of Seal of Robt de 
St. Quintin, p. 152. 

329 c. Seal — John de Warrenne, plate 

lxxxi. 

330 Two Small Shields of Essex, plate 

xx. 

331 Socretum— Thos. Duke of Glou- 

cester, p. 152. 

332 John of Eltham, plate xix. 

332 A. Seal — Queen Margaret, plate 
lxxxi. 

332 b. Seal — Wm. do Clinton, plate 

lxxxi. 

333 Milo of Hereford, plate xx. 

334 Her Majesty the Queen, p. 332. 

335 Arnold de Gaveston, plate xix. 
335 a. Isahelle, Queen of Edward II. 

p. 135. 

335 b. Piers de Gaveston, plate xix. 
335 c. Champagne, p. 170. 
33C Edward III. - Lincoln, plato 
xxxiv. 

337 England and Hainault, p. 159. 

338 Effigy of John de Hastings, plate 

xxi. 

338 a. Shield of John do Hastings, p. 
112. 

332 The Block Prince, Lincoln, plate 
xxxiv. 

340 Woodstock and De Bohun, plate 

xx. 

341 De Bohun and FitzAlan, plate xx. 
842 Thomas de Holland of Rent, 

plato xxii. 
343 Tiptoft, Holland, and Powys, 
plate xxii. 



zed by Google 



LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS. 



601 



No. 
344 

345 

Oil? 

*tH&gt; 
347 
348 
349 
350 
351 
352 
353 

354 

355 
356 
357 

358 

359 



361 
362 
362 



364 



364 a 

365 

366 

3«J6 A 

366 B 

367 

368 

369 

370 

371 

372 

873 

374 

375 

376 

377 



Impaled Shield of Jaines II. of 

Scots, plate xxii. 
The Countess of Lennox, plate 

xxii. 

The Countess of Richmond, plate 
xxii. 

.. Edmond Tudor impaling Beau- 
fort, plate xxii. 
Seal— Henry of Bolingbroke, p. 
165. 

Henry IV. and Navarre, plate 
xxiii. 

Richard H. and Bohemia, plate 
xxiii. 

Richard II. and France, plate 
xxiii. 

Henry VII. and Elizabeth of 

York, plate xxiii. 
Henry VI. and Margaret of 

Anjou, plate xxiii. 
H.H.R. the late Prince Consort, 

p. 314. 

Stafford and Butler, plate xxiv. 

Stafford and Butler, plate xxiv. 

Campbell, plate xxiv. 

Stafford, Butler, and Campbell, 
plate xxiv. 

Stafford, Butler, and Campbell, 
plate xxiv. 

Stafford, Butler, and Campbell, 
plate xxiv. 

Bentinck, plate xxiv. 

Stafford, Butler, Campbell, and 
Bentinck, plate xxiv. 

Bentinck impaling Stafford, But- 
ler, and Cnmphell, plate xxiv. 
. Coronet of a Marquess, plate 
lxiv. 

Bentinck with Stafford, Butler 
and Campbell in pretence, plate 
xxiv. 

Bentinck quartering Stafford, 
Butler and Campbell, plate 
xxiv. 

Powys and Holland, plate xxiii. 
Furnival, plate xxv. 
De la Zouche, plate xxv. 
De la Zouche, plate Ixvii. 
De la Zouehe, plate lxvii. 
Newburgli, plate xxv. 
De Beauchamp, plato xxv. 
De Beauchamp, plate xxv. 
De BtAuehamp, plate xxv. 
De Beauchamp, plate xxv. 
De Clifford, plate XX v. 
De Clifford, plate xxv. 
De Roh, plate xxvii. 
De Trumpingdon, plate xlviii. 
De Balliol, plate xxvii. 
De Cobham, plate xxv. 



381 
382 



384 
385 
386 
387 

388 



No. 

378 De Cobliam, plate xxv. 

379 De Cobham, plate xxv. 

379 a. A Label of Modem Cadency, 
plate xiii. 
Crescent of Modern Cadency, 

plate xiii. 
Mullet of Modern Cadency, plate 
xiii. 

Martlet of Modern Cadency, plato 
xiii. 

Annulet of Modern Cadency, 

plate xiii. 
Fleur-de-lys of Modern Cadency, 

plate xiii. 
Rose of Modern Cadency, plato 
xiii. 

Cross Moline of Modern Cadency, 

plate xiii. 
Octo-foil of Modern Cadency, 

plate xiii. 
Fitz Nichol, plates xxvii and 
xlviii. 

388 a. De Umphraville, plate xxvii. 
388 b. W. Bardolph, plate xxvii. 
388 c. T. Bardolph, plate xxvii. 
388 D. Cross - Crosslet fleurie, plato 
xlviii. 

388 e. Cross - Crosslet botonee, plato 
xlviii. 

388 r. D'Arcy, plato xxvii. 
388 g. D'Arcv, plate xxvii. 
388 H. D'Arcy, plato xxvii. 
388 i. D'Arcy, plate xxvii. 
388 k. D'Arcy, plato lxxi. 

388 l. D Arcy, plato lxxi. 

389 De Saltmarsh, plato xxxvii. 

390 De Brewys, plate xxxvii. 
390*a. De Brewys, [date lxvii. 

390 b. Do Faucombe, plato lxvii. 

391 De Swynborne, plate xxxvii 
391 a. Sir T. Dalton, plate lxvii. 
391 b. John de Warre, plate lxvii. 

De Berkeley, plate xxxvii. 
De Berkeley, plate xxxvii. 
Howard Ancient, plate xxxvii. 
Grimstone, plate xxxvii. 
Creville, plate xxxvii. 
De Bohun of Hereford, plate 
xx. 

397 a. De Bohun Seal, plate lxx. 

398 De Bohun of Northampton, plate 

xx. 

398 a. De Bohun Seal, plate lxx. 

399 De Montfort, plate xlix. 

400 Clyutou, plate xxxvii. 

400 A. Clynton, plate lxvii. 

401 Ughtrcd. plato xxxvii. 
401 a. Ouchtred, plate lxvii. 

401 b. Oittrich, plate lxvii. 

402 Basset, plato xxxvii. 



3t&gt;2 
393 
394 
395 
3!&gt;6 
397 



Digitized by Google 



502 



LIST OK ILLUSTRATIONS. 



No 

403 

404 
404 A. 
405 
400 
407 
408 
408 a. 
400 
410 
411 
412 

412 A. 
418 

413 A. 
413 0. 
414 
41a 
410 
417 
418 
410 
420 
421 
422 
423 
424 
424 a. 

424 b. 
425 

425 A. 



I to - n , plate xxxvii. 
St. John, plate xxviii. 
St. John., plate xxviii. 
Dauby gne, plate xxviii. 
Daubygne, plate xxviii. 
Daubygne, plate xxviii. 
Dauby gne, p. 134. 
Daubygne, plate Ixxiii. 
Graham, plate xxviii. 
Deincourt, plate xlviii. 
I lay Jon, plate xlviii. 
De Merley, plate xlviii. 
Do PayneU, plate lxvii. 
De Bonn, plate xlviii. 
De Vaus, plate lxviii. 
Sir John Mounteney, plate lxviii. 
De Valence, plate xxxviii. 
De Valence, plate xxxviii. 
Do Valence, plate xxxviii. 
De Valence, plate xxxviii. 
De Valence, plate xxxviii. 
De C'haworth, xxxviii. 
De Cbaworth, xxxviii. 
Do Chaworth, xxxviii. 
Fitz Ralph, plate xxxix. 
De Peyver, plate xxviii. 
De Deyville, plate xxviii. 
De Deyville, plate lxviii. 
John Neville, plate lxviii. 
Shield at Selbv, plate xxviii. 
Shield at Abcrgaveuny, plate 
xxxix. 

425 b. Giffard, plate xxxix. 

420 De Rachecourte, plate xxviii. 
420 a. Hakebnt, plate lxviii. 
420 b. Broniflete, plate xxxix. 

426 c. De Cantelupe, plate xxxix. 

427 Do Beaumonte, plate xxviii.* * 
427 a. De Ryther, plate xxxviii. 

427 b. Parya, plate xxxviii. 

428 De Potonhall, plate xxviii. 

429 Lothian, plate xxxii. 
422 a. Lothian, plate Ixxi. 

432 Edward 11^ as Prince Royal, plate 
xlv. 

431 De Tretwell, plate xxxviii. 

432 De Fitz William, plate xlix. 

432 a. Elmebrigge, plate xlix. 

433 Sir John de Cornwall, K.G., plato 

li. 

434 Estofford, plate L 

435 De Welle, plate L 
435 a. De Trussell, plate L 

430 St. Am and, plate L 

431 Wake, plate 1. 

438 De Courtenay, plate L 

432 De Bascrevillc, plate L 
442 Do Vipont, plate L 

440 a. Avenel, plate lxix. 

441 De Quincey, plato xlix. 



: No. 

I 442 Le Blond, plato L 
J_Li De Burgh, plato L 
ill Do Vaux, plate L 
445 De Creke, plato xlviii. 
440 De Fortihus, plate L 
447 De Mounchesncy, plate xlviii. 
4 is Shield from Arderne Brass, plate 
xl. 

442 Du Verdon, plate xl. 
4M Blantling— Earl of Essex, plato 
li. 

452 a. Mantling— Lord Berners, plate 
lxv. 

452 b. Mantling— Earl River*, plate 
lxiv. 

450 c. Lord Beaumont, plate lxiv. 

451 Mantling George of Clarence, 
plato \L 

4 5 1 a. Crt st — John Beaufort, K.G., plate 
ilL 

451 b. Sir Thomas Lancaster, plate 
lxxii. 

452 Fynderne, plato xl. 
452 a. De la Pole, plate xl. 
452 b. Do Neville, of Salisbury, plato 

xl. 

452 c. De Neville, plate xl. 
452 d. Eleven differenced Shields of 

Neville of Raby, p. 223. 
423 Wm. de Lancaster, plate xl. 

454 De Cautevillc, plate xL 

455 Bassett, plate xl. 
450 Rtdph, Lord Bassett, K.G., plate 

xl. 

457 De Kendall, plate xl. 

458 Fitz Marmadukc, plate xl. 

459 Grandison, plate xlix. 
422 Grandison, plate xlix. 
400 a. Bishop de Grandison, plate 

Ixxiii. 

421 St Quintin, plate xxvii. 
4il2 St. Quintin, plate xxvii. 

403 De Ferrers, plate li. 

404 Montbourchier, plate li. 

405 Le Despencer, plate li. 
400 John de Wheathaiustede, plate li. 

422 De Lacy, plate xlix. 
408 Ermine' Label-— fit Alban's, plate 

xxxi. 

422 Ermine Label— Gt Yarmouth, 

J date xxxi. 
ward L as Prince Royal, p. 
113. 

471 Henry of Lancaster, p. 173. 

472 Label of York, Great Yarmouth, 
plate xxxi. 

413 Label of George, Duke of Cla- 
rence, plate xxxi. 
411 Label of Richard of York, plate 
xxxi. 



&gt;y Google 



LIST OK ILLUSTRATIONS. 



503 



No. 

475 Holland of Kent, plates xxxii. 
ami lxv. 

47C Humphrey of Glo'ster, plate 
xxxii. 

477 De Vere, with Bordurc, plate 
xxxii. 

477 a. Holland of Exeter, plates xlv. and 

lxv. 

478 Richard of Coningsburgh, plate 

xxxii. 

470 Beaufort, plate xxxii. 

480 Cardinal Beaufort, plate xxxii. 

481 Thomas Beaufort, K.G., plato 

xxxii. 

482 Edmund Tudor, plate xxxii. 

483 Jaspar Tudor, plato xxxii. 

484 Thomas Beaufort, E.G., plate 

xxxii. 

485 Label of Richard II., plate xxxi. 
480 Henry of Bolingbroke, p. 253. 

487 Henry V. as Prince of Wales, p. I 

230. 

488 Edmond of Lancaster, plate xlv. 
488 a. Henry, Duke of Lnucaster, plate 

lxiii. 

480 Ld&gt;el— Monument of Edward 
III., plate xxxi. 

400 Lionel of Antwerp, plate xxxi v. 

401 John of Ghent, plate xxxiv. 

402 Edmond of Luigley, plate xxxiv. 

403 Henry of Bolingbroke, plate 

xxxiv. 

404 Ermine Label plate xxxi. 

495 Label of Lancaster, plate xxxiii. 

406 Label of York, plate xxxi. 

407 Label of Leon and York, plate 

xxxiii. 

408 Label of Castile, plate xxxiii. 

409 Lalwl of Castile and Leon, plate 

xxxiii. 

409 a. Label of York and Castile, plate 
Lxxiv. 

500 Label of Richard III., plate xxxi. 

501 Label— - Last of the Plantage- 

nets," plate xxxi. 

502 John Lovel, plate xxxiii. 

503 Sir Edward Montague, p. 225. 

503 a. Sir Alexander Giflard, plate Lxxx. 

504 Label— Sir H. Courtenay, plate 

xxxiii. 

505 Label— Sir P. Courtenay, E.G., 

plate xxxiii. 
500 Label— Sir G. Courtenay, plate 
xxxiii. 

507 Label of Latymer, p. 228. 

508 Label of Latymer. p. 228. 

509 Seal— Thomas of Glo'ster, plate 

lxx. 

510 Diaper— Seal of Thomas of Glo's- 

ter, p. 38. 



No. 

511 Swan Badge — De Bohun Brass, 

p. 254. 

512 Bear and Staff Crest, plate xxx. 

513 Daere Badge, plate xxxix. 

514 Knot— Anne of Bohemia, plato 

515 Stafford Kuot, plate xxx. 
510 Bourchier Knot, plate xxx. 

517 Heneago Knot, plato xxx. 

518 Wake and Ormonde Knot, plate 

xxx. 

519 Bo wen Knot, plate xxx. 

519 a. Crest— Scott of Thirlstane. plate 

xxvi. 

520 Crest— John Duke of Bedford. 

plate xxx. 

521 Crest — John Mowbray, plate xli. 

522 Panache-Crest of John Lord 

Scrope, p. 419. 

523 Achievement of the Earl of Staf- 

ford, K.G., p. 204. 

524 Dragon Crest, Thomas of Lan- 

caster, plato xxxv. 

525 Seal of Thomas Holland, plate lxx. 
525 a. Kirkpatriek Crest, plate xxx. 
52G Lunce Flag, Bayeux Tapestry, 

plate xxix. 

527 Lance Flag, Bayeux Tapestry, 

plate xxix. 

528 Banner— Henry De Lacy, plate 

xxxv. 

529 Banner — Sir Symon do Fel- 

bryge, plate xxxv. 

530 Heraldic Sail, plate xxxv. 

531 First Rod Ensign, plate xxxvi. 

532 Second Red Ensign, plate xxxvi. 

533 Present Red Ensign, plate xxxvi. 
531 St. George's Ensign, plate xxxvi. 

535 Present Blue Ensign, plate xxxvi. 

536 England — (two lions;, plate lviii. 
536 a. England, plate lviii. 

536 b. France Ancient and England, 
plate lviii. 

536 c. Richard II., plate lviii. 

536 1). France Modern and England, 
plate lviii. 

537 Royal Shield of the Stuarts, plate 
lviii. 

537 a. Ireland, plate xlvi. 

538 Nassau, plate, xlvii. 
530 William III. aud Mary, plate lix. 
430 a. William III., plate lix. 

540 Arms of Queen Anne, plate lix. 

541 Hanover, plate xlvii. 

542 (ieorge I., plate lix. 

542 A. Electoral Bonnet of Hanover, 
plate lxxvi. 

543 George III., plate lix. 

543 A. Her Majesty the Qneen, plate lix. 

544 Badge of Richard I., plate xlvii. 



504 



LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS. 



No. 

545 Budge of Henry VII., plute, 
xlvii. 

5 1G Badge of James 1., plute xlvii. 

547 Pouthien, plate xlvii. 

548 Crown of Richard I., plute xlii. 

549 Crown of Berenguria, plate xlii. 

550 Crown of Edward II., p. S17. 

551 Crown of Henry IV., p. :tlT- 

552 Crown of Henry V., plate xlii. 

553 Crown— Henry VI.. plate xlii. 

554 Crown — Edward IV.. plute xlii. 

555 Crown— lvlwur.l IV., (Great 

Beal), plate xlii. 
550 Crown— Henry VII. (King's I 
Chapel), p. 372. 

557 Crown— Murguret Tudor, p. 380. 

558 Crown- Henry VIII., plute xlii. 

559 Crown — Henry VIU. (Norwich), 

plute xlii. 

560 Crown— Charles I., xlii. 

561 Crown— Charles II., plute xlii. 

562 Crown of England, p. 319. 

562 a. Crown— U.K. II. the lute Prince 

Consort, p. 321. 

563 Coronet— U.R.H. the Prince of 

Widen, p. 321. 

564 Coronet— Royal Princes, plute 
• xli. 

565 Coronet— Royul Princesses, plate 

xli. 

566 Coronet— Royal Kinsmen, plate 

xli. 

567 Crest— Scotland, plute xlvi. 

568 Arms of H.R.H. the Prince of 

Wale?, p. 328. 

568 a. Lubel of H.R.H. the Prince of 

Wales, plato xxxvi. 

569 Label— H.R.H. the Prince Al- 

fred, plate xxxvi. 

570 Label— H.R.H. the Prince Ar- 

thur, plate xxxvi. 

571 Label— H.R.H. the Princo IjCo- 

pold, plate xxxvi. 

572 Label — H.R.H. the Princess 

Royal, plute xxxvi. 

573 Label — H.R.H. the Princess 

Alice, plate xxxvi. 

574 Label — H.R II. the Princess 

Helenu, plute xxxvi. 

575 Lubel — H.R.H. the Princess 

Louisa, plate XXXVi. 

576 Label — H.R.H. the Princess 

Beatrice, plate xxxvi. 

577 Isabel of Cambridge, plate xxxvi. 

578 Banner— Knights Hospitallers, 

plate xxxv. 

579 Banner — Knights Templars, 

' Beau-Sea nt , plate xxxv. 

580 Banner — Knights Tempers, 

plate xxxv. 



No. 

581 Tall Budge— Sir R. de Bois, plate 

xxxix. 

582 SS. Collar— Queen Joanna, plute 

xliii. 

582 a. Monogram and Collar of SS.— 

John Baret. p. 492. 

583 SS. Collar— Lord Hungerford, 

plate xliii. 

584 SS. Collar— Sir R. de Marmion, 

plate xliii. 

585 SS. Collar-Sir W. Philip, KG., 

plate xliii. 

585 a. SS. Collar— John Gower, plate 

xliii. 

586 Yorkist Collar — Knight at Aston, 

plate xliv. 

587 Yorki.st Collar— De Nevilles, plate 

xliv. 

588 Yorkist Collar — Countess of 

Arundel, plate xliv. 

589 Yorkist Collar— Countess of Es- 

sex, plute xliv. 

590 Garter of the Order, plate liv. 
590 A. Star of the Garter, plate liv. 
590 b. Collar of the Garter, plate liv. 
590 c. The George, plate liv. 

590 D. The oval George, plato liv. 

591 Garter— Earl of Essex, plate 

xliii. 

591 a. Garter— Earl of Essex, plate 
xliii. 

| 592 Garter— Sir T. Boleyn, plate 
xliii. 

j 593 Star of the Thistle, plate lv. 
593 a. Collar of the Thistle, plate lv. 
593 n. Jewel of the Thistle, plate lv. 

593 c. Jewel of the Thistle, plato lv. 

594 Collar of St. Patrick, plate h i. 
594 a. Star of St Patrick, plate lvi. 

594 b. Jewel of St Patrick, plate lvi. 

595 Collar of the Bath, plate ML 
595 a. Star of Knights, G.C.B . p. 348. 
595 b. Star of Knights. K.C.B., p. 349. 
595 c. Badge of the Bath, plute Ivii. 

595 d. Civil Budge of the Bath, plate 

Ivii. 

596 Collar of Star of India, plate lix. 
596 A. Badge of Star of India, plate lix. 

596 B. Star of Star of India, plate lix. 

597 Cross of Victoria Cross, plute 

xlvi. 

598 Westminster Deauery and School, 

plate xlvii. 

599 Westminster Abl&gt;ey, plate xlvii. 

600 Oxford University, plate xlvii. 

601 Cambridge University, plate 

xlvii. 

602 The Heralds' College, p. 422. 

603 Garter, plate xlvi. 

604 Norroy. plate xlvi. 



Digitized by Google 



LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS. 



505 



No. 

605 Clarencieux, plate xlvi. 

600 Ulster, plate xlvi. 

607 Westminster City, plate xlvii. 

608 Sacred Symbolical Shield, p. 

39JL 

609 Real — William do Roumare, plato 

xlv. 

610 Sec re turn — Henry of Lancaster, 

p.32L 

611 Helm— Black Prince, plato xlv. 

612 Helm— Lord Basset!, plate xlv. 

613 Howard Modern, p. 433. 

614 Duke of Wellington, p. 432. 

615 Duke of Marlborough, p. i^l 

616 Modern Hatchment, p. 41."&gt;. 

617 Sword Pommel — Black Prince, 

p.MSx 

618 Examples of Labels, p. 4. r &gt;5. 

619 Hesse, p. 416. 

6*20 The Austrian Crown, p. 471. 

621 The Prussian Crown, p. 473. 

622 Sir Rauf do Arundel, p. 43S. 

623 Tho Stuart, plate lxii. 

624 The Coronation Crown, p. [^L 

625 The Seton, plate lxii. 

626 (or 627 a.) Bodge of Richard H., 

p. 432. 

627 White Hart Badge, p. 35JL 

628 Rebus— Bishop Uldhnm, p. 124, 

629 De Bohun Garter-plate, plate 

lxvi. 

630 Tabard, John Feld, p. L1L 

631 John de Holland, plate Ixv. 

632 Thomas do Mowbray, plato lxv. 

633 Ramryge — plate Ixxvii. 

634 Hameldene, plate lxviii. 

635 Syrnon de Montagu, plato xix. 

636 William de Montagu, plate xix. 

636 A. Simon de Montagu, plate xix. 

637 Holland Ancient, plate lxv. 

638 Benumonte, plate lxviii. 

639 Bigot, plato lxxi. 

640 Plompton, plate lxxi. 

641 Heracuhale, plate lxxi. 

642 Acres, plate lxxi. 

643 I&gt;c Erpingham, plate lxviii. 

644 Wassingstonc, plate lxxi. 

645 Balliol, pi v. Ixrii. 

646 Segrave, plate lxxii. 

647 DEstlec, plato lxxii. 

648 Mountpynzon, plate lxxii. 

649 De Peche, plate lxxii. 

650 Sir W. Philip, K.G., plate lxxii. 

651 De Welly ngtono, nlate lxxi. 

652 Sir J. de Harpenuon, plato lxxii. 

653 Sir W. do Warren, plato lxxi. 
054 De Bassett, plate lxxi. 

655 De Segrave, plate lxvii. 

656 Fragment ol Shield, Whatton, p. 

'2 IS. 



No. 

657 Shield, Clehongre, p. 37JL 

658 Shield — Gorleston, plate Ixxiii. 

659 De Badlesmere, plato Ixxiii. 

660 L'Estronge, plate lxii. m 

661 De Hastings, plate lxii. 

662 Talbot, plate lxii. 

663 Courtenay, Earl of Devon, plato 

lxii. 

664 Archbishop Courtenay, plato 

Ixxiii. 

665 Bishop Stapledon, plate Ixxiii. 

666 Bishop Lc Dcspencer, plato 

Ixxiii. 

667 Seal— Neville, p. 458. 

668 Soul— Neville, p. 458. 

669 Audelc, plate Ixxiv. 

670 Lovel, plate lxxiv. 

671 De la Vache, plate lxxiv. 

672 Truilinge, plate lxxiv. 

673 Bourehier, plate lxxiv. 

674 Courtenay, plate lxxiv. 

675 Courtenay, plate lxxiv. 

676 Captal de Buch, plate lxxiv. 

677 The Emperor, plate lxxvi. 

677 A. The Emperor, p. 452. 

678 The Emperor, plate lxxvi. 

678 a. Tho Emperor, p. 464. 

679 Shakspearc, plate Ixix. 

680 Chaucer, plate Ixix. 

681 Gower, plate Ixix. 

682 De Topclifle, pinto Ixix. 

683 Seal— Jaspar Tudor, p. 413. 

684 Feather Badge, plate lxxvi. 

684 a. Slab of Honry IV.— Venice, plato 

lxxix. 

685 Feather Badge, plate lxxvi. 

686 Feather Badge, plate lxxvi. 

687 Diagram — Denmark, p. 22S. 

688 Feather Badge, p. 252. 

689 Feather Badge, p. 252. 

690 Heraldic Roses, plate lxxvi. 
601 Crest— St. Quintin, p. 27IL 

692 Crest— DErcsby, p. 2JJL 

693 Crest— Lysle. plate lxiv. 

694 Crest — Arumlel, plate lxiv. 

695 Bourchier-Knot, p. 285. 

696 Tho Prince of Wales, plato Ix. 

697 Anns of Wales, plate lx. 

698 Arms of Wales, plate lx. 

699 Arms of Wales, plato lx. 

700 St. John— Seal, p. 463. 

701 St. John— Seal, p. liii 

702 Thurston— Seal, p. 404, 

703 lx* Vavasour— Seid, p. 424. 

704 Sir .J. Bardolf— Seal, p. 4DJL 

705 Lady Bardolf— Seal, p. 4116. 

705 A. Eliz. D'Amori— Seal, plate Ixxxi. 

706 Lady Filliol— Seal. p. 40&amp; 

707 Earl of Arundel— Seal, p. 41fL 
707 a. Richard, Earl of Arundel, p. 2fiS, 



zed by Google 



:&gt;o&lt;; 



LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS. 



No. 

708 Beatrice, Countess Arandel, p. 

480. 

709 Denmark — Frederick IL, plate 
* Ixxv. 

710 Denmark — Princess of Wales, 

plate lxxv. 

711 Ram's Head—St. Alban's, plate 

lxxvii. 

712 Rain's Cellar— St. Alban's, plate 

lxxvii. 

713 Shield with Englo— St. Albans, 

plato lxxviii. 

714 Shield with 3 Crowns, plate 

lxxviii. 

715 Shield — Ramrvge, plate lxxviii. 
71G Shield— St. Aiban's, p. 45JL 

717 Wheat-ear Badge, p. 45JL 

718 The Prince of Wales, p. 322. 



| No. 

719 Lozenge of Scotland and Den- 

mark, pi; 1 1' - lxii. 

720 Tho Priuco of Wales, plato lxiii. 

721 Two Ermine-spots, p. 4.'&gt;4. 

722 (Jueldres, plate lxii. 

723 Mnnguldas Nuthoobhoy, of Bom- 

bay, p. 3ZL 

724 Cowasjeo Jehanghier, of Bombay, 

p. 411. 

725 Molosworth, p. 222. 

720 Astley, Baron Hastings, p. 222. 

727 Harpur Crewe, p, 2£29, 

728 Seal — Robert de Vere, plato 

Lxxxii. 

729 Seal — William do Montacnte, 

plate lxxxii. 

730 Neville Ancient, p. 4SL 

731 Cursetjee Furdoonjee Paruk, of 

Bombay, p. 506. 




, 

'^•GOOD-CONSCIE NCE IS A SUREDEFENCE* 

^ 

No. 73!.— Ctrsetjee Firpoonjeb Parfe, of Bombay. 

See p. 4AS. 



zed by Google 



INDEX. 



Abatement, 27, 90, 13U ; of Illegitimacy, 
43ft 

Abbot, George, Archbishop of Canter- 
bury, 7JL 
Abbot'a Stuff, iS, 
Abbreviations, 19, 4J23. 
Abercorn, the Marquis of, 46. 
Al&gt;ergavenny, the Earl of, 207. 28JL 
Abergavenny, Slab at, 189. 
Abeyance, 90. 

Abingdou, the Earl of, 40, ML 
Abinger, the Baron, tiiL 
A bouche, LL 

Accessories of Shields of Anns, 1211 ; 

differenced, 198. 
Aecolee, 469. 
Accosted, TL 
Accrued, 77. 

Achievement of Arms, 9_L 115 ; on 

Seals, 2££ ; the Royal, 33L 
Acorn, 7JL 2ti2. 
Aero, 8ir Wm. d', 1112. 
Acre, Sir Simon d , 132* 
Addorsed, 77. 

Adelaide, of Saxe-Meinengen, 313. 

Admirals, their Flags, 291 : Early Seals 
of, 412. 

Admiralty Flag, 32. 

Adventurers, Merchants, 367 : of Bris- 
tol, 368. 

jEschylus ; his Theban Heraldry, 13. 
Affrontee, 77, 82. 
Agulon, Robert, 182. 
Alant, 6JL 

Albany Herald, 112. 

Albemarle, D'Aumale, William do 

Fortibus, Earl of, JJJfi. 
Albemarle, Edward Plantagenct, Duke 

of, 243. 

Albert. II R.H.. tlio lute Prince Consort ; 
his Arms, 162, 252, 311 ; Crest, 315 ; 
Supporters, alii ; Motto, 315; Coronet, 
321. 

AhVrt Edward, H.R.H.. the Prince of 
Wales, K.O.. 1L&amp;1 ; his Label, 252 ; 
Arms. 322 : Arms of the Second 
Order, 323 ; Arms marshalled and 



blazoned in full, 324 ; Arms mar- 
shalled "by Authority," 327; D»- 
signs for marshal liug his Arms, 329. 
3&gt;0 : Arms marshalled by Scottish 
Heralds, 331 ; his Supporters, 823 : 
his Crest, 323; his Motto, 321, 323 : 
his Coronet, 321* 323; his Badge of 
Wales, 260, 32_L 323; his Arms, im- 
paling Denmark Proper, 322. 

Albert Vietor, H.R.H.. of Wales, 252. 

Alencon, John Plantagenct, Duke of, 
244, 

Alencon, Due d\ 470. 
Alexander I. .Czar of Russia, K.O., 473. 
Alexander HI., of Scotland, 32. 
Alexandra, H.R.H., of Denmark, the 
Princess of Wales, 311 ; her Arms, 

325, 32JL 322. 
Alfred, H.R.H. the Prince, 252, 33L 
Alianorc, of Aqnitaine, 293, 306; her 

Crown, 315. 
Alianore do Bohun. See Bohun. 
Alianore, of Castile and Leon ; her Arms, 

38, 42* 306_; the first in England to 

quarter Arms, 157 ; her Seals, 1 ."w ; 

her Crown, 265, 316; her Monument, 

382, 384. 382. 
Alianore Holland, 114, 389. 
Alianore, of Lorraiue. 22iL 
Alianore Plantagenct, 4H8 
Alianore, of Provence, 306. 
Alice, H.R.H.. the Princess, 252, 3ai . 
Alice, Countess of Eu, 4(&gt;3. 
Allerion, 67. 

Allerton Maulcverer, Brass at, 262. 

All Souls' College, Oxford, 358, 361. 

Altenberg, Arms of, 313. 

Amelia, the Princess, 25L 

Amori, Roger d', 406. 

Anachronisms in Modern Monuments, 

SSL 
Anchor, 31L 

Ancient Rome, the Eagle of, 3, 422. 
" Ancient Scottish Seals," Mr. Laing's 

excellent Work on, 456. 
Andeville, Arms of, 409. 
" Anecdotes of Heraldry,' t."&gt;(i. 



ized by Google 



508 



INDEX. 



Angel (the coin), 417. 

Angels, as Supporters, 66, 4 'jo. 

Angenne, 39, 25. 

Angouleme, Arms of, 306, 393. 

Angoideme, Isabel of, 

Angoideme, Louise, Duchess of, 4GS. 

Angouleme, Due d*, 470. 

Angus, William, Eurl of, 184. 

Anhnlt, Arms of, 313. 

Animals, Heruldie, Glj as Accessories 

of Shields of Arms on Seals, 2TC. 
Animate Beings, 55. 
Anjou, Arms of, 307. 
Anjou, John Plantagenct, Duke of, 

224. 

Anjou, Margaret of, 1G5, 3C3; her quar- 
tered Arras, 307. 
Anlaby, Alnack d\ 19JL 
Annandalc, the Marquis of, 51; Crest 

of, 274, 

Anne, of Bohemia. 16_6_ ; her Arms, 307 : 

her Effigy, 38, 259, 284. 
Anne Boleyn, her Badges, 305 ; her 

augmented and quartered Arms, 300. 
Anne, of Burgundy, 24L 
Anne, of Ch ves, 309. 
Anne, of Denmark, 251 ; her A rms, 3K&gt;. 
Anne Neville, 166: her Arms, 308. 
Anne Plantugenet, of Woodstock, 226. 
Anno riantagenet, of York, 434. 
Anne Stuart — Queen Anne, 251 ; her 

Arms, 299j Badge, 305^ Crown, 218. ; 

Coins, 4 1 s. 
Annulet, 39_i for Dinerencing, 19G ; in 

Modern Cadency, 206 : Annulets 

blazoned as " faux Roundlets," Iflfl. 
Antelope, 5^ 6JL 

Antiquaries, A rms of the Society of, 365. 
Antlers, 77. 

Apothecaries Company, 370. 
Appaumee, 77. 

Aquitainc, 30G. See Alianore. 
Archbishops, the, Ol^^JL; their Bank, 

Style, and Titles, 91, 420; Arms, 169. 

357, 358. 
Arched Crown, 318. 
Archee Coronetteo 313. 
Arehiepiscopal Staff, 357. See Crozier. 
Architectural Heraldry, 322. 
Arderno, Sir Thomas, 121, 2G7. 
Arderne, Sir Peter, 19JL 
Argent, 19, 9_L 

Argyll, the Duke of, 46j his Arms, 462 ; 

Supporters, 280. 
Arm, 56, 304. 

Armagh, Archbishop of, 91j his Arms, 

358. 

Aimed, 12,40,62, 7JL 
" Armes Parlantes." 92, 125, 
" Armes pour Enquirer," 465. 
Armourers* Company, 370. 



Armoury, 91. 

Arnioyec, 21. 463. 

Amis, Heraldic, 91; of Archbishops, 
357 ; of Bishops, 358; of Colleges, 
360 : of Companies and Guilds, 3G7; 
Corporate, 145 : of Deans and Chap- 
ters, 359 ; of Dominion, 91, 294; of 
Heir, 137 ; of Heiress and Co-Heiress, 
140; of Son of Heiress, HO; of 
Daughter of Heiress, 143 ; of Heralds' 
College, 364j of Husband and Wife, 
139; of Kings of Arms, 365; of Lyon 
Office, 3G5 ; of Monasteries, 300*; of 
Municipal and other Corporations, 
3G. r ) ; of Peeress in her own right, 
109: of Peers' Daughters, 144j of 
Public Institutions, 365; of Public 
Schools, 364: of Prince and Princess 
of Wales, 322j Royol, 295j of Royal 
Consorts, 300 ; of unmarried Ladies, 
145; of Widowers, 144 : of Widows, 
145. 

Arms " brought in," HI ; Compounding, 
153; Dimidiating, 1 40 ; Impaling, 139 ; 
Inheritance of. 135. 157; Marshalling, 
136. 13g ; Official, 144 ; permanent 
Combination of, 140 ; Property in, 
136: Quartering, 156. 157 ; temporary 
Combination of, 138. 

Arms, Shields of, " for Peace," 236, 25L 
388; " for War," 23^ 256, 38&amp; 

" Anns found," 443. 

" Arms," assumed, 442. 

Arms of Knights of Orders, Marshalling 
of, 168, 468. 

Arragon, Arms of, 308. 451. 

Arragon, Catherine of ; her Badges, 305 ; 
Quartered Anns, 308. ; Supporters, 309. 

Arroudie, 77. 

Arrow, 40 ; Arrows, Sheaf of, 40, 2&lt;;i. 

Art, Heraldic, 448. 

Arthur, H.R.H.. The Prince, 252, 33L 

Arthur Tudor, 40» 59, 260; his Arms, 
325; Badges, Til Seal, iHj Monu- 
ment at Worcester, 75, 380. 

Arthur, Robert, 486. 

Artois, Blanche d', 235. 

Artois, Comto d', 470. 

Arundel, Monuments of the Fitz- Alans 
at, 132, 339. 

Anindel, The Fitz-Alans, Earls and 
Countesses of; Crest, fill Coronets, 
105. See Fitz-Alun. 

Arundel, Edmund d , 27_L 409, 418. 

Arundel, John, Earl of ; his Seal, 415. 

Arundel, Ralph d\ 437. 

Arundel, Richard, Earl of; his Seal, 208. 

Arundel, Thomas, Archbishop of Canter- 
bury, 217; his Seal, 102. 

Arundel, The Baron : Arms. 65. 

Ascania, Bernhard, Count of, 415. 



INDEX. 



509 



Ashehurste, Sir Adam, 202. 

Ashton, Rebus of, 5^ i^i 

Ash-tree, 123. 

Ashwellthorpo, 267, 336. 

Assyrian Sculptures, 67. 

Astoley, Thomas, 22a, 

Astley : Arms, 460 ; Badge, 262. 

Astley, Baron Hastings, 229. 

Acton, interesting Effigies at, 339. 

At Gaze, 62, 82. 

At Speed, G2. 

Athol, the Duke of, 5fL 

Attainder, 9.2, 

Aubeny, D' : Arms, 214. See Daubeny, 
D'Aubigne. 

Audele, Sir Hugh, 224. 

Audele, Sir James, 224. 

Augmentation of Honour, 78, 93, 143, 
4:::; : Difference by, 229, " of 

Merit," 433j "of mere Grace, ,, 433; 
early Examples of, 433; granted by 
Richard, IL, 126, 434; granted by 
Henry VIII., 30!», 3J0, 4^£; true and 
truly M honourable," 443 j Scottish, 
435 ; of Foreign Heraldry, 470. 

Augmented, 78. 

Augusta, The Princess, 254. 

Aumberdene, Nicholas, 6Ji 

Austria Proper, Arms of, 471. 

Austria, The Empire of : Arms, 474 ; 
Supporters, 471 ; Crown, 471 ; Im- 
perial Eagle, 471 ; Imperial Standard, 
472; National Flags, 472. 

Austria, Francis, Emperor of, K.G. ; his 
Uarter-Plate, 474. 

Aveline do Fortibus, Countess of Lan- 
caster, iw, :ts:&gt;. 

Avenel, William d\ 19JL 

Avesnes, Alice d' ; her Seal, 150. 

Axe, 40, 

Aylesbury, John d\ 225. 
Aylesbury, Thomas d\ 225. 
Azure, 93. 

Bacinet, Basinet, 95, 102. 

Bacon : Arms, 212. 

Bacoun, Sir Edm. do, 184. 

Baden : Arms, 474 : Supporters, 474. 

Badges, 93, 254, 394 ; mentioned by 
Shakespeare, 255 ; marshalled with 
Achievements of Arms, 171 ; Differ- 
enced, 199, 256, 441 ; two Classes of, 
255; Series of, 261 ; Royal, of Eng- 
land. 74, 75, 303, 306, 332, 378j of 
Ostrich Feathers, 12, 256, 323 ; Swan, 
260; White Hart, 263, 454j Ears of 
Wheat, 453; of Scotland, 132^ 3o5j 
of Ireland, 45, 128^ 305; of Princi- 
pality of Wales, 332 ToT Fitz-Alans, 
339 ; of Nevilles, 339.; on Monuments, 
394 ; in modern Heraldry, 441. 



Badge, or Jewel, of Knights of the 
Order of the Garter, 341 ; of Offi- 
cers of tho Order of the Garter, 343; 
of the Order of the Thistle, 345: of 
the Order of St. Patrick, 346; of tho 
Order of the Bath, 349j of tho Order 
of St. Micliael and St. George, 351 ; 
of the Order of the Star of India, 352 ; 
of the Legion of Honour of France, 
354 ; of the Order of the Mcdjidie of 
Turkey, 354 ; of the Orders of tho 
Daniicbrog and the White Elephant 
of Denmark, 355, 356 : of Ulster, 56, 
94: of Nova Scotia, 95. 

Badlasmere, Bartholemew dc, 213. 

Buginton, 336. 

Bagot : Arms, 460. 

Bagot, Sir William and Lady, 204, 33iL 
Bagot, John, 187. 
Ball, 40, 

Balliol ; Arms, lsL 
Bttllio], Eustace, 210. 
Balliol, Hugh de, 'JAIL 
Balliol, John de. 2J±L 
Balliol, Richard de, 242. 
Balliol College, Oxford. 360, 
Balsam, Brass at, 160, 387. 
Bangor : Arms of the See, 358. 
Banded, 7_&amp; 

Banner, 40, 93, 287_; at Sea, 288; on 
Seals, 410j at Caerlaverock, 288, 485, 

Banneret, Knight Banneret, 93, 287; 
at Caerlavenwk, 487. 

Bannerman, Sir R., ill. 

Bar. 22,40. 

Barbarossa, Tho Emperor, 345. 

Barbed, 66, 126, 

Bardcd, 78j Bardings, IS, 

Bardolf, Eliz., Lady, her Seal. 406, 40JL 

Bardolf, John. Lord, his Seal, 10JL 

Bardolf, John, 176. 

Banlolf, Thomas, 176, 1SL 

Bardolf. William, 176, 1*L 

Barct, John, his Monogram and Collar 

of SS., 337, 422* 
Barington, Sir Philip de, 204. 
Barkcle, Morris de, 1S3. 
Barley Garbe, 74. 
Barlow, Sir M., GO. 
Barnacles, 40. 
Baron, 94. 

Barons, their Style and Coronets, 94. 
Baronets, their Order, Rank and Badges, 

56, 94. 

Barre, De, Arms of, 125, 148, 308, 4115. 

Bur re, De, Henry, 151. 

Barre, De Joan, her Seal, 405. 

Harrington, Sir M„ 100. 

Bars Gemelles, 22, 40j for Differencing. 

207: Examples of, 213. 
Barrulee, Baroly, Bnr'lee, 36, 78. 



ized by Google 



510 

Bamilct, 22, 10. 
Barry, 35, 28. 
Barry Bendy, 36, IS. 
Bar-wise. 30. 78. 
Bascreville, Walter de, 105. 
Bascreville, William de, 195. 
Base, lit. 

Basinet, Bacinet, 95, 102. 
Ba*sett, the Brothers, 181. 
Basset t, Sir John, 209. 
Bussctt, Ralph, LonL 109, 208, 213 ; his 

Helm, 269, 455. 
Bassett, Rauf, 2ns. 
Bassett, Kichard de, 215. 
Bassett, Sir Symon de, 208. 
Bassett, William, lilL 
Bat, iiL 

Bath Herald, 95, ILL 

Bath, Order of the ; instituted, re- 
modelled, and in its present Consti- 
tution, 347 ; Knights Grand Cross, 
347 ; Knights Commanders, 347; the 
earliest enrolled Knight, 347; Compa- 
nions, 348—350 ; Badges, 349; Naval 
and Military Insignia, 348 : Diplo- 
matic and Civil Insignia, 349 ; Motto, 
283. 350. and its first Occurrence, ail ; 
Stall-Plates and Banners, 318. 

Bath and W f ells. Anns of the See, 352, 

Baton, 40 j Baton Sinister, 437. 

Battering-Ham, UL 

Battlc-Axc, 31£L 

" Battle of Spars," 135, 

Battled, 18. 

Battled, Emhattled, IS. 
Baud, Sir Walter, ILL 
Baux, Francis de, 308. 
Bavaria ; Arms, Supporters and Motto, 
474. 

Bayeux Tapestry, 3. 
Beacon, 4&lt;&gt;. 
Beaked, 78. 

Bear and Ragged Staff, Badge, 63^ 256. 

Bearers, '27!). 

Bearing, Bearings, 9JL 

Beatrice, H.B.H.. the Princess, 252, 31L 

Beatrice, of Portugal, her Seal, 4S0. 

Bcaucliomps. their Differences, 179, 180. i 
202. in the Rous Roll, 49Q; early 
Shields of, 179, 198j later Shields of, 
179 ; their Monument-. 179,250,387. 

Beauehamp, Guy, Earl of Warwick, 179. I 

Beauchamp, Richard, K G., Earl of 
Warwick, 104, 108, BJ2; his Effigv, 
344: Crest, 2iiil ; Seal, 218. 

Beauchamp, Richard, Bishop of Salis- 
bury, 312. 

Beauchamp. Sir John, K.G., 179. 

Btauchamp, Thomas, K.G., Earl of 
Warwick, 113, 382 ; his tine Brass, 25iL 

Beauchamp, Roger, 179. 



INDEX. 

Beauchamp, Sir Giles, 179. 
Beauchamp, Sir Walter, 179. 
Beauchamp, Sir John de, -02. 
Bcauchnmp, Sir William, 17!&gt;. 
Beauchamp, William de, 162, 215. 
Beauchamp, Margaret, of Bletso, 249, 
392. 

Beauchamp, of Hachc, 309. 
Beauchamp. Shield of, charged with 

Martlets, 179, 187. 
Beauchamp Chapel, at Warwick, 179. 

18G. See W T arwick. 
Beauforts, their Cadency, 204, 248 ■ their 
Legitimation. 2 48 ; "Badges. 5n. "J^S, 
202; Crest, 199, 207 ; Label, 21fL 
Beaufort, John, K.G., Earl and Mar- 
quess of Somerset and Dorset, 248 ; 
his Arms before a.d. 1397, 437. 
Beaufort, Henry, Cardinal, 204, 248. 
Beaufort, Thomas, K.G., Duke of Exeter, 
&amp;c, 199, 248, 267; Seal as High 
Admiral 112. 
Beaufort. John, K.G., Duke of Somerset, 
199, 248. 249; his Badge, 258: 
Monument, 344. 
Beaufort, Edmond, Second Duke of 

Somerset, 24 s. 
Beaufort, Edmond, Fourth Duke of 

Somerset, 24 i&gt;. 
Beaufort, Henry, Third Duke of Somer- 
set, 249, 

Beaufort, Joan, Queen of Scotland, her 

Lozenge of Arms, 415. 
Beaufort, Margaret, Countess of Rich- 
mond, 228, 249, 318, 319; her Monu- 
ment described. 3H1. 
Beaufort, Margaret de, 228. 
Beaufort, Fitz-Roy Somerset, Duke of, 
36, 2S0. 

Beaumont, Lewis de. Bishop of Durham, 
218. 

Beaumont, John, K.G., 191 : his Mant- 
ling, 1 16- 
Beaumont, Margaret de, 411. 
Beaumonte, Sir John, 191. 
Beaumonte, Sir Thomas, 191. 
Bee. Anthony, Bishop of Durham. 218. 
152. 

Beche, Sir John de, 202. 
Beckfonl, Crest of. 20'. t. 
Beddington. Brasses at, 6]\ 194. 
Bedford, John Plantagenct, K.G., Duke 

of. &amp;c, 244, 26JL 
Beilford. Jasjwir Tudor, K.G.. Duke of. 
Earl of Bedford, 74, 211L; his Seals, 
303 412 4 1 3. 
13wlford, Russell, Duke of. 63,162. 
Bees, 66; of Franc e, 470. 
Belgium. Anns of, 474 ; Supporters, 

474 ; Standard and Ensign, 474. 
Belgium. Leopold, King of, K.G.. 250. 



Digitized by Google 



INDEX 



511 



Bell, 40; Belled. IS, 

Bend, 23. 40; ft.r Differencing, 221 ; 

Examples of, '210. 
Bendlet, 23, 40; for Differencing. 207: 

Examples of, 210. 
Bend-Sinister. 24, 40, iZL 
Bend-Wise, 23, 30, 28. 
Bendy, 36, IS, 
Bentimk, Arms of, 1 12. 
Bere, Richard de la, 212, 
Bcrcng.iria, of Navarre, The Queen. 300, 

383. 

Berengncr, of Spain : Arms, 40: &gt;. 
Beresforde, B., 182. 

Berg, aia. 

Bergavennv. See Neville. 
Berg( dorft* 42S, 

Berkeley*, their Arms, 75, 183; Differ- 
ences. 175. 193 ; Badge. 68; Crest, 4JL 
Berkeley, Maurice de, 222. 
Berkeley, Thomas, I^ord, 68, 235, 
Bernadotte, Arms of, 478. 
Berners, John, Lord, K.G., 22£L 
Bemers, The Lady Margery, 221L 
Berries, 111 

Berrington, Mr. ; his lithograph of tho 

De Valence Shield, ISO. 
Bcrri, Due de, 470. 
Bertie, Motto of, 2£L 
Berwick, The Baron, GJL 
Beulee, Richard de, 1I&gt;4. 
Beverley Minster, 38, 48; Effigy of 

Priest at, 383: Percy Shrine at, 382, 

383 ; Lions at. 151L 
Bezant, 25, 40; Bezantee, Bezanty, IS. 
Bihle, The Holy, liorne as a Charge, 862, 
Biggleswade, Brass at, 224, 
Bigod. Eurl of Norf.dk : Anna, 428, 
Bi^'ot, De : Arms, 122, 
Billet, 33,411; for Differencing, UlL 
Billettee, Bi Hetty, 33, IS. 
Bird-Bolt, 40. 

Birds, Heraldic, 63 : of Prey, QL 
Bishops, their Style, Runk, and Arms, 

05. 06. 160 ; their Sees and Arms, 357. 

358,322. 

Bishops of London, Durliam, and Win- 
chester. 05, 112, 
Biase. or Snake, OIL 

Black Prince, Edward Plantagcnct, 
KG., The; the first Prince of Wnles, 
by Creation, 236, 237; Karl of Ches- 
ter and Duke of Cornwall, 230 ; his 
Arms, 70, 239; Shields " of War," 
and " of Peace," 236, 256: Signature, 
308 : Badge, 256j Crest, ILL 266: 
Label, 236: Basinet, Helm and Coro- 
net, lno, 20'.».455 : Pommel of Sword- 
Hilt. £18, 4AL Will, 226j Gauntlets, 
44: Monument. 385, 388: Effigy. 
10-2. 113, 342. 



Black Princo, his Wife, 236. 

Blackwood, 74. 

Blauckeul.M rg. :'.13. 

Blayney, The Baron, 63, 

Blazon, Blazoning, 8, 26. 

Blickling. Brasses at, 07. 

Blondevillo, Ranulph, Earl of Lincoln 
and Chester, 403. 

Blonde, William le, 122. 

Blount : Arms. 45^. ICQ. 

Blount. Sir Thomas, 182. 

Blue-Mantle, Pursuivant, ILL See 
Herald. • 

Boer's-Head, 125, 

Bohemia : Arms, 259, 3»7. 

Bohemia, Anne of! See Anne. 

Bohemia, John, King of. 257 , 465. 

Bohun, Do : Anns, 21 ; Differeuces, 205. ; 
Badge, 65, 254. 258, 2iil ; Shields and 
SealB. 154, 186, 409. 

Bohun, Alianore de, Duchess of Glou- 
cester, 211 ; her Brass, 43, 155, 162, 
385. 449: fully described, 389. 

Bohun. Humphrey de, the first of that 
name, 154. 

Bohun, Henry do, First Earl of Hereford, 
1M. 

Bohun, Humphrey de. Third Earl of 
Hereford ; his Seal andSecretum, 151. 
412 ; Crest, 266; Supporter. 277; In- 
ventory, 127. LfiQ. 

Bohun, Humphrey de, K.G , hurt Earl of 
Hereford; his Stall-Plate, 116, lSii, 

Bohun, William de, K.G., Earl of Nor- 
thampton, 186, 422, 

Bohun, Margaret de. 222, 

llohun, Mary de, 101. 

Bohun, Edward de. 26JL 

Bohun. John de, 151. 

Bois, Sir Roger de and \.a&lt;\\\ 335. 

Boleyn, Anne, The Queen, 302. 

Boleyn, Sir Thomas, K.G., Earl of Wilt- 
shire and Ormonde, 105. 108. 344. 

Bolingbroko. See Heiiry Plautagcuet. 

Bologne : Arms, 306. 

Bologne. Matilda of. The Queen, 306. 

Bolton, Rebus of, 54, 

Booth, 40. 360. 362, 

Border-Lines, 18. 

Bordure. 33 : fur Cadency. 2_LL 211 ; for 
Difference, 222; impaled, 33, 163 : 
quartered, 33, 144 ; Examples of, 214. 
248. 249 : in the Arms of Prelates, 
217 : of England, 242; of France, 242 ; 
in Scottish Heraldry, 217. 
Bordured, Bordered, 28. 
Boroughbridge, Battle of, 160. 
Boston, Brass at, 75. 122, . 
Boterols, 213. 
Bothe, Roger del. 332. 
Botiler, Botelor, John le, 43, 214, 



ized by Google 



512 



INDEX. 



Botiler. Three Coats of, 4f»0. 

Botiler, of Worn, 183. 

Botonee, Botony, Gobony, 40. 

Botonee Fitehco, 41. 

Bottrcaux, William. Lord, 279, ILL 

Bottreaux, Margaret, Ladv of, 411. 

Bonn, De, 7_L 22. 

Bum, Fmne de, 187! 193. 

Boun, Sir Gilbert le, li»2. 

Bourehicr, Hctirv, KG., Earl of Essex 
and En, 22*}, 339, 344j his Mantling, 
115: Crest, 270_i I«bel, 226. ; Brass, 
38A321. 

Bourchicr, Sir Humphrey, 2S5 ; his 

Monument, 3ii£ 
Bourchicr, John, K.G., Lord Bernere : 

Mantling, 115. 
Bourchicr, Ludovie Itobsart.K.G., Lord, 

44: Anns, 5_4_, 226, his Crest, 270: 

Monument, 271, 3HL 
Bonrchier, William, Lord Fitz-Waryn, 

22G. 

Bourehicr-Kriot, 284, 285, 3QL 
Bourdon, 41. 
Bourdon, John, 18. 

Bouton, M. Victor; his "Treatise on 

Heraldry," 103, 470. 
Bowed, 17- 
Bowen-Knot, 284. 
Bowers Gifford, Brass at, 190. 
Boyne, The Viscount, 68. 
Boys, Edw. do, 208, 
Boys, Sir Robert de, 454. 
Boyton, Effigy of Crossed-legged Knight 

at, 225. 
Brabazon, Sir Roger, 187. 
Braced, Brazed, 78. 
Bradston : Arms, 167. 
Bradston, Sir Thomas, 202. 
Braganza, Catherine of, The Queen. 31 1. 
Brandenburgh Anspach, 312. 
Brandon : Arms, 460; Badge, 262. 
Brandsburton, Brasses at. 2L4. 
Branspeth, Effigies at, 332. 
Braose. See Brewys. 
Braybroke, the Baron, 58, 4G0. 
Braye, the Baroness, GIL 
Brazen-NoHO College, Oxford : Arms, 

3J1L 

Brehna, or Engcrn, 313. 
Brett, Sir Amyas, 2LL 
Brcttepee, 7JL 
Brewers' Company, 373. 
Brewys De, or Do Braose, Sir Giles, 
175.2QL 

Brewys, Sir John, 176, 2fi9_ ; Crest, 20iL 
Brewys, John, 176. 
rewys, Piers, 181. 
rewys, Richard, 175. 
Brewys, Sir Thomas, 410, 
Brewvs. Sir William, 175j 10£L 



Brewys, William, lfiL 
■ Breys, 41. 
Bridport, The Baron, 65. 
Brisee, ififi. 

Bristol Cathedral, 5_L 183. 
Bristol : Anns of City, 3o'6. 
Bristol : Arms of See, 350. 
Bristol, Merchants Adventurers, of, 368. 
Brisurc, Brizurc, 41, 466. 
Britannia, 22. 
Britchebury, Avery, 210. 
Brittanv, John, Count of, 34, 208. 
Brittanv, Canton of, 1T»L I^ilx;l of. 
23iL 

" Brochant sur lo tout," 4T.5. 
Brodsorg, Die, 467. 
Broke, Robert, Lord, '205. 
Bromflete, Sir Thomas, 191 ; his Helm, 

269. 

Bromsgrove, 264, 269, 33iL 
Brotherton, Thomas de : Anns, 112. 153, 

235, ILL 
Brotherton, Edward de, 410. 
Brotherton, Margaret de, 133. 
M Brought in," ILL 
Brownlow, The Earl, 49, 68. 
Broxbourne, Brass at, 132. 
Bruce. Roliert the, 56j his Motto, 283: 

Earl of Carrick. 
Bruckhausen, 313. 

Brunswick : Arms, 312. 474 ; Sup- 
porters, 475. 
Brunswick, Caroline of. The Queen, 

312, 

Brunswick, Charles William, Duke of, 
312. 

Bras, Robert le, 2LL 

Bryan, Bryenne. Sir William de, 46, 269: 

his Crest. 208. 
Bryan, Sir Guv do : his Crest, 269. 
Bryan, Elizabeth de, 222. 
Buchanan : Badge, 263. 
Buch, TheCaptnl de, K.G., 228, 229. 
Buckingham, Thomas Plantagenot, 

1 hike of. See Thomas Plantagenet. 
Buckingham, Alianore, Duchess of. See 

Bohun. Alianore de. 
Buckingham, The Dukes of. of the 15th 

Century. See Stafford. 
Buckingham. Badge of, 262. 
Buckingham, Chandos Grenville Nu- 
gent Temple, Duke of; his Crest, 

273; Supporters, 280. 
Buckingham Palace, Royal Heraldry 

at, 315. 

Buckle, 11 ; of Pelham, 2G2. 43L 
i BufTalo's-Head, 312. 
Bulmer, Rauf de, lftL 
Bunbury, Effigv at, 26A 
Buoy of a Ship, 262. 
Bnrdett, John. 18L 



INDEX. 



513 



Burgh, Hubert do. Earl of Kent, 197. 

Burgh, John de, Earl of Ulster : Anna, 
166, 239. 242. 

Burgh, Elizabeth de,her Seal, 151, 238. 

Burghersh Monuments in Lincoln Ca- 
thedral, 162, 222, 237, 240, 296, 387. 

Burgouet, 41, 

Burgundy : Arms of Dukes, 42L 
Burgundy, Charles " the Bold," Duke 

of, am 

Burgundy, Anne of, J 1 1 . 

Burgundy, Philip of, 244. 

Burke, Sir Bernard, his Peerage, 121. 

Burnet, Brass at, 366. 

Burnhamthorpe, 324. 

Burton, Rebus of, 54j Sir Thomas, 336. 

Burwash : Arms, 4:»0. 

Bury St Edmunds, Church of St. Mary 

at, 332. 
Bury, Elizabeth de, 402. 
Butler : Arms, 139, 302. 
Butterflies, 61L 
Byllynge, Nichol, 21fi. 
Byron, The Baron : Arms, 77, 81, 221, 

Cabossed, 63, 78. 

Cadency, Definition of, 96, 173, 178; 
various Forms of, 177 ; Eurly Usage, 
174; Single Marks, 200, 204j Modern 
Usage of, 206 : in Modern Heraldry, 
441 ; Royal, 206, 251, 253; of Plan- 
tagenets, 231, 234. ; of Hollands. 242 ; 
of Beauforts, 248_; of Tudors, 249; of 
Nevilles, 203 ; not affected by Quar- 
tering, 144. 

Cadet, 96, 132. 

Calthorpe, Sir William, 394, 

Caltrap, 4L 

Calveley, Sir Hugh, 134; his Crest, 264, 
Camail, 102. 

Cambridge : Arms of University, 362. 
Cambridge, Edmond Plantagenet, "of 

Langley," K.G., Earl of, 24_L 
Cambridge, Richard Plnutagenet, " of 

Coningsburgh," K.O., Earl of, 243. 
Cambridge, Richard Plantagenet, Earl 

of, 245. 

Cambridge, Adolphus Frederick, K.G., 

Duke of, 25L 
Cambridge, George William Frederick 

Charles, K.G., Duke of, 33L 
Cambridge, 1L R. IL, The Princess Mary 

of,33L 
Cambridge, Label of, 252. 
Camden, William, Clarencicux King of 

Arms, 100. 
Camden, The Marquess, 03. 
Cameron: Badge. 263 ; Crest, 223. 
Canioys, Lord, K.G., 107, 336, 344, 483. 
Camoys, Margaret de, 52, 222. 
Camoys, Rauf de, 195. 



Campbell : Arms, 141 ; Badge, 263, 

Campbell, Duke of Argyll, 462. 

Campdcn, John do, 395. 

Canniug, The Earl, 5jL 

Cantelo, William de, 102. 

Cantolupe, William, de, 63, 122. 

Canterbury : Arms of the See, 96, 352. 

Canterbury Cathedral, Monument of the 
Black Prince in, 385, 388; Monu- 
ment of Henry IV. IHT337 : Cloisters, 
4A5^14JL18A21^37L410_; Stained 
Glass in, 44, 

Canterbury : Arms of the Deanery, 360. 

Canterbury : Arms of the City, Sflft 

Canting Heraldry, 96, 124, 

Canton, 31 ; Use in Marshalling, 143; 
for Differencing, 207; Examples of, 
208 ; of Paternal Arms, 143j with a 
Bordure, 33. 

Cantoned, I'J. 

Carbuncle, Escarbuncle, 4L 

Canligan, The Earl of, 45, 202, 

Cardinal's Hat, 96. 

Carew : Arms, 57, 450. 

Carew, Piers de, 2LL 

Carlaverock, Karlaverock, Caerlaverock. 
Roll of, 237, 288 ; New Version of, 487: 
Siege of, 154 ; Banne rs and Bannerets 
at, 288,482. 

Carlisle ; Arms of the See, 358. 

Carlisle, The Earl of, 202. 

Carnegie, William, Earl of Northesk, 

Caroline, of Brunswick, The Queen, 312. 

Caroline Wilhelmina, The Queen, 312. 

Carpenters' Company, 370. 

Carrick, Feudal Earldom of, 324, 330. 

Oarrick, The Bruce, Earl of, 330. 

Carrick, Duncan, Earl of, 330. 

Carrick, John, Earl of, 330. 

Carrick, Albert Edward, Prince of Wales, 

Earl of, 322, 324, 330, 33L 
Car-Standard, 232. 
Carysfort, The Earl of, 57. 
Casket, Heraldic, at Goodrich Court, 147. 
Cassuben : Arms, 312, 
Castile and Leon, Alianore of. See 

Alianore. 
Castile and Leon, Constance of, 2 3D. 
Castile and Leon, Ferdinaud 111., King 

of, 157. 

Castile and Leon, Isabella of, 24_L 243. 

Castile and Leon, John " of Ghent," 
King of, 239, 402. 

Castile and Leon : Arms, 42, 306 : Quar- 
tered Shield of, 157j Label, 24JL 246 ; 
Bordure, 243, 4BO ; Tincture of the 
Liou of Leon, 490. 

Castle, 42j of Castile, 400. 

Castle Acre Priory, 3JL; Arms. 360. 

Cat-a-Mountain, 62. 

2 L 



zed by Google 



:&gt;i4 



INDEX. 



Cathedrals, Heraldry of the, 322. 
Catherine of Arragon, The Queen, 308 ; 

Badges, 305. 
Gathenae of Braganza, The Queen, 311. 
Catherine of France, The Queen, 307. 
Catherine Howard, The Queen, 310. 
Catherine Parr/The Queen, 310j Badges, 

305. 

Catherine Plantagenet, 216. 

Catherine Swyneford, 337 ; Monument 

in Lincoln Cathedral, 385^ 324. 
Catherine Hall, Cambridge, 3tJ3. 
Catherine- Wheel, 2IL 
Cauteville, De, 196. 
Cavendish ; Arms, 62j Motto, 2&amp;L 
Cecil, 207, 210. 
Centaur, 01 
Cercelee, 29. 
Cerise, 5_L See Scruse. 
Chains in the Arms of Navarro, 480. 
Chamberlain, The Hereditary, of the 

German Empire, 473. 
Chamfron, 42. 

Champagne : Arms, 158, 170. 

Chandos, Sir Robert de, 37. 

Chandoa, Edward de, 22L 

Chandos Arms, 183, 

Chapeau of Estate, ILL 

Chaplet, 42j of Roses, 75, 194. 

Charge, Charges, 8j Charged, 7JL 

Charles Li &lt;"» Prince of Wales, 250; 
Arms, 298; Supporters, 303; Crown, 
318 ; Badges, 305: his Grant to 
Baronets, 95. 

Charles IL, as Prince of Wales, 250: 
Arms, 298 : Supporters, 303; Crown, 
318; Badges, 305: his Grants to 
Barons, 114 ; Arms of his Natural 
Sons, 438. 

Charles IL, King of Navarre, mi 

Charles V., of France, 23. 

Charles " the Bold," of Burgundy, 355. 

Charles William, of Brunswick, 312. 

Charlotte, of M&lt; &lt; kit nburgh-Strelitz,The 
Queen, 312. 

Charlotte Augusta, Princess of Wales, 
250. 

Charlotte Augusta Matilda, 251. 
Charlton, Cherlton, Edward Baron, of 

Powys, 114, 382. 
Charlton : Arms, i££L 
Chartham, Brasses at, 43, 13J, 48G. 
Chastilon, The Viscount, 229. 
Chastilon, Mary de, 362. 
Chaucer, Geoffrey, 461. 
Chaussee, 79. 
Cha worths: Arms, 18JL 
Chaworth, Sir Patrick, 189. 
Checkenden, 183. 
Cheeky, Cheouee, 36, 7JL 
Cheshire, Nobility and Gentry of. 2L 



Chess-Rook, 42; Chess-Knight, He- 
raldic, 148. 

Chester, the Earls of, 70, 74_1 Edward 
III , as Earl of. 2Sjj AlWt Edward, 
Prince of Wales, Earl of, 222, 323. 

Chester: Arms, 393, 459. 

Chester : Arms of the See, 358. 

Chester : Arms of the City, 149. 

Chester Herald, ILL 

Chester-le-Street. Effigy at, 2LL 

Chevalier, as a Charge, 31L 

Chevron, 24j 42_; for Differencing, 207: 
Examples of, 213. 

Chevronel, 24,42; for Differencing, 202. 

Cheyno, Thomas, 193. 

Cheyne, Rauff. 2L6. 

Cheney, Sir John, K.G., 338. 

Chichester : Arms of the See, 55^ 358. 

Chief, 16, 22, 42j for Differencing, 207 ; 
Examples of, 212. 

Chigni, of Savoy : Arms, 469. 

Chigwell, Brass at, 129. 

Childrey, Brass at, 204. 

Chipping Camden, Brass at, 118. 

Cholmondeley, The Marquess, 45. 

Cholmondeley : Motto, 283. 

Christ College, Cambridge : Arms. 363. 

Christchurch Cathedral, Oxford, 227, 26U. 

Christchurch College,Oxford : Arms.301. 

Christchurch, Hampshire, 382. 

Chrishall, Brass at, 180. 

ChristiernXI., King of Sweden.K G..478. 

Christiern, Duke of Hrunawiek.lv G.,474. 

Churchill, John, K.G., Duke of Marl- 
borough, 435, 402. 

Cinqucfoil, 42, IL 

Cinque Ports : Arms, 149; Seals, 413. 
Civic Crown, 42. 

Clare, De, Ancient Device of, 238 : Arms, 
2L 24j Seal, 146; Badge, 42; dimi- 
diating Fitzgerald, 147 : dimidiated 
by Cornwall, 146 ; and impaled by 
Cornwall, 147, 23L 

Clare, Earl Richard do, 147, 23L 

Clare, William de, 223. 

Clare, Sir Thomas de, 147. 

Clare, Elizabeth de, 362_; her Seal, 406. 

Clare, Margaret de, 140. 

Clare, Differenced Shield of, L9L 

Clare Hall, Cambridge, 362. 

Claremonte Nesle, 148. 

Clarence, George Plantagenet, K.G., 
Duke of, 246; his Crest, 266. 

Clarence, Lionel, K.G., Duke of, 232. 

Clarence, Thomas Plantagenet, K.G., 
Duke of, 213. 

Clarence, William Henry, Duko of, after- 
wards King William IV., 25L 

Clarence, Sir John de, 437. 

Clarencieux, King of Arms, 96, 111 : 
Arms, 3fi5. 



oy Google 



1NDKX. 



515 



Clarendon, Sir Roger de, 437. 
Claricordc, Clavicorde, 42. 
Clarion, 42. 
Clarke, Sir John, 435. 
Clasps, 352. 

Claasic Architecture, Non- Heraldic, 373. 

Clavering, 8ir Allan, 212. 

Clavering, John, 225. 

Clayton and Bell, 3IH 

Clehongre, Effigy at, 212, 37A 4. r )l. 

Clenched, 2L 

Clettenburgh, B13, 

Cleveland, The Duke of, 62, 458. 

Cleves, Anne of, The Queen, 302, 

Clevea : Arms, 313. 

Clifford : Arms, 180j Motto, 2i&amp; 

Clinton, John de, 213, 402. 

Clinton, John, Lord, IPS. 

Clinton, Thomas, 184, 22L 

Clinton, William, Earl of Huntingdon : 

Seal, 407. 
Clinton : Badge, 202. 
Clogher, See o£ 55. 
Clopton: Arms, 211. 
Cloth workers' Company and Hall, 369. 
Close, 22, 
Closet, 22, 12. 
Clouee, 53, 29, 
Clovis, 7JL 

Clyfton, Nycol de, 123, 
Clynton, William, Earl of Huntingdon, 
1B3. 

Coats of Anns, 4. 96j to be distinguished 
from Badges, 4 10. 

Cobham, Family of, GO, 180j their 
Brasses at Cobham, in Kent, 127, 180, 
1115 ; Badge, 2U2. 

Cobham, Eleanor de. Duchess of Glou- 
cester, 245. 

Cobham, Henry de, 189. 

Cobham, Sir John de, 180. 

Cobham, Rauf de, 180. 

Cobham, Sir Reginald de, 180, 

Cobham, Thomas de, 180. 

Cockatrice, 67. 

Cogsale, William, 122, 

Coif of Mail, 102, 

Coins, Heraldry of, 97, 416; Ancient, of 
Sicily, 487 ; Modern, of England, 118. 

Coker: Arms, 309. 

Colchester, The Baron, 76. 

ColeshilL Cross-legged Effigy at, 338. 

Collar, 97* 335j Marshalled, 168, 111 ; 
of Mermaids, 68, 835 ; of the Order 
of the Garter, 341, 342 ; Lancastrian 
of SS., 112, 128, 335; under Henry 
VII., 338; under Henry VIH., 338; 
present Use of, 338 ; various Pendants 
worn with, 338 ; Yorkist, of Suns and 
Rosea, 108, 338, 339; Pendants worn 
with, 339j of the Order of the Thistle, 



315; of the Order of St. Patrick, 34G_; 
of the Order of the Bath, 348j of the 
Order of St. Michael and St George, 
850 ; of the Order of the Star of 
India, 352 ; of Foreign Orders of 
Knighthood, 355, 46A 

College of Arms, 91, ILL; Arms, 364; 
Crebt, 31LL 

Colleges of Oxford, their Arms, 360; of 
Cambridge, their Arms, 362; Eton, 
364. 

Colley : Arms, 401. 
Colomb, 65. 

Colour, Colouring, Heraldic, 44s'. 

Colours, 16, 97. 

Column, 313. 

Col wall, Brass at, 210. 

Comb. 42. 

Combatant, 79. 

Combinations, Heraldic : Temporary, 
138: Permanent, 140. 

Commonwealth, Great Seal of, 402. 

Companions of the Order of the Bath, 
348, 350. 

Compartment, 448. 

Componee, Compony, Gobony, 30, 70. 

Compounding Arms, Com] founded Arms, 
79, 97, 153. 

Compound Quartering, Early Examples 
of, 152. 

Compton : Badge, 40, 202. 

Corny n, Sir John, 182. 

Confessor, Edward the; or, Saint 
Fklward; Arms, 29, 65, 126, 390; 
Origin of the Martlets of his Shield, 
I SO ; Shields in Westminster Abbey 
and Hull, 126, 378 ; his Arms impaled 
by Richard IL, 126, 288, 296; quar- 
tered by Edward IV., 297; granted to 
Thomas and John Holland and to 
Thomas Mowbray, 126 ; assumed by 
Henry Bolingbroke, 127. 164; as- 
sumed, a. D. 1546, by the Duke of 
Norfolk, 127. 

Coningsburgh, Richard Plautagenot, of, 
243,245. 

Conjoined, 79j Conjoined in Lure, 79. 
Constable of England, 1 55. 
Constance, of Castile and Leon, 164. 239. 
Constance Cathedral, 107. 
Contoise, 98, 116, 267. 
Contournee, 79. 

Conventionalisms in Heraldic Drawing, 
450. 

Conyngham, The Marquess, 5L 
Coopers' Company, 370. 
Corbet, Rebus of, 125. 
Corder, Sir Galyon, 213, 
Cork, See of, 52. 
Cormorant, 65. 
Cornish Chough, 65. 

2 l2 



ized by Google 



516 INDKX. 



Cornwall : Arms, 323, 31)3. 

Cornwull : Richard, Karl of, and Em- 

peror, X± 214, 234. 
Cornwull, Ed mond, second Earl of. 234 ; 

his Single Supporter, 234, 277. 
Cornwall, " John of Eltlioro.'Earl of.235. 
Cornwall, Edward, K.G., Duke of, 103, 

234L 

Cornwull, Sir John do, K.G., Lord Fan- 
hope, 21*^ 234, 

Cornwall, Piers de Gaveston, Earl of, 581 . 

Cornwall, Allwrt Edward, Princo of 
Wales, Duke of, 322, 324, 330. 

Cornwall, impaling Clare, 147. 

Coronets, 97, HI ; of Princes and Prin- 
cesses, 322 ; of the late Prince Con- 
sort, 321 ; of the Prince and Princess 
of Wales, 321 ; Foreign, 480 ; of 
Dauphin, 470; English, are not 
jewelled, 4SH. 

Corporate Bodies : Arms, 145. 357. 3C5 ; 
Crests. 266. 

Corpus Christi College, Oxford, 30L 

Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, 362. 

Co8yngton, William, de, 124, 

Cortises, 23, 52j for Differencing, 20L 

Cotised, 22, 79, 207. 

Couci, De ; Anns, 459. 

Couchant, 79. 

Couchrfe, 16, 79. 

Coudiere, 2H.1. 

Count, Compte, Comes, 98, 4 SO. 
Counter, 79. 

Counter-changing, Counter-changed, 36, 

Counter-charging, 406, 407. 

Counter-componee, 30, 79. 

Counter-embattled, 78. 

Counter-embowed, 79. 

Counter-fleurie, 80. 

Counter-indented, 311. 

Counter-passant, 80. 

Counter-potent, 20. 80. 

Counter-rampant, 58. 

Counter-salient, 80. 

Counter-seals, 228. 

Counter-tripping, 88. 

Oouuter-vair, 20. 

Counties : Arms, 370, 

Countess, 98. 

Oouped, 80, SV, 105. 

Courant, 8iL 

Court of Chivalry, 13iL 

Courtenay: Label, and original Arms, 
lii ; Arms, 195, 207_; Labels, 220, 
228; Bordure, 2UL 

Courtenay, William, Archbishop of Can- 
terbury, 217, 22L 

Courtenay, Sir Edward, 222. 

Courtenay, Edward de, Earl of Devon. 
'J 10. 227. 



Courtenay, Hugh, Earl of Devon, 222. 
Courtenay, Sir Hugh, 72j 227, 210 ■ 

Mantling, 11£L 
Courtenav, Hugh de, Earl of Devon, 195. 

226. 

Courtenay, Henry de, Earl of Devon, 
210 . 

Courtenay, John de, 220. 
Courtenay, Sir Peter, K.G., 64, 22L 
Courtenay, Sir Philip, 212, 22L 
Courtenay, Rol&gt;ert do, 'I'll. 
Courtenay, Thomas, Earl of Devon, 228 . 
Courtenay, Sir William, 216,222. 
Courthope, William, Esquire, Somerset 

Herald, 488. 
Couste. See Cotise. 
Covered Cup, 43. 
Covert, 80. 
Coward, Cowed, 80. 

Cowosjee Jehanghier, of Bombay : Arras, 

Crest, Motto, 44fL 447. 
Crampetto, Crampcttee, 42, 80. 
Cmncelin, 42, 314. 
Cranfield, Lionel, Baron, 191. 
Crauley, Archbishop, 100, ISSL 
Creke, John de, 197. 
Crenelles, Crenellee, 8JL 
Crescent, 71. 

Crests, 4, 98, 109, 264_; in Blazon, L7J ; 
us distinguished from Badges, 250 ; 
differenced, 199, 206 ; early Examples 
of, 204 ; hereditary, 272 ; not borno 
by Ladies, 200; two or more borno 
by the some Person, 273 : Marshalling 
by, 275; of Corporate Bodies, 200 ; 
Modern, 212. 

Crest, of Black Prince. 206 ; of England, 
200, 331 ; of Scotland, 332, 415j of 
Ireland, 322. 

Crest-Coronet, 98, 267, 420. 

Cast- Wreath, 28. 

Crested, ml 

Crevecceur, De, 400. 

Crimean Medal, 353. 

Crined, 80. 

Cromwell, Oliver, the Protector : Arms, 
402. 

Cromwell, of Tateshall, 5A 
Crosby, Sir John, and Lady, 339. 
Cross, 23,42, 

Cross, Heraldry of the, 26. 

Cross, Botonee, Botonee FitcheV, 30; 
Crosslet, Crosslet Fitcheo, 29.; of 
eight Points, 28j Fleuretteo, 29j 
Fleurio, 29j Fourchee, 29j Moline, 
29 ; Patonce, 29_[ Pommee. 29j Po- 
tent, Potent Fi tehee, 30; Potent 
Quadrate, 30; Pointed, 28_I Quad- 
rate, 28 ; Quarter-pierced, Quarterly- 
pierced, 29j Recercelee, 29; Trcflee, 
30 ; Urdce, 22. 



Digitized by Google 



INDEX. 



.517 



Crosslets, favourite differencing Changes, 
Crossed-legged Effigies not Templars, 

aai. 

Crosses, Decorations of Honour, 352. 

Crozier, 42, 49, 100. 

Crouchback. See Edmond. 

Crown, of Great Britain, 99; as a 
Chargo, 02 ; the Imp. rial. 315 ; His- 
torical Examples of, 3J 5, 319; Arched, 
317; of H.M. the Queen, 320, 332_; 
of Herald Kings, 112, 357. 

Crown, Heraldic, fine Examples of, 
blazoned on a Shield at St Albans, 

Crown, Antique, 100 ; Celestial, 100 ; 

Eastern, Radiated, 100; Mural, 99j 

Naval, 99j Vallary, OIL 
Crown, (Coin), of gold and Silver, 417. 

418. 

Crowns, Foreign, 99j of Austria. 47J ; 
of France, 421; St Stephen's, of 
Hungary, 472; of Prussia, 473. 

Croydon, 358. 

Crusader Kings of Jerusalem, 8, LL 

Crusades, 3, 287. 

Crusilee, Crusilly, 29, 80. 

Crystal Palace, Collections of Casts ftt 

the, 386; Casts of early Shields of 

Saxony at the, 478. 
Cumberland, ErneBt Augustus, Duke 

of, King of Hanover, 25L 
Cunningham, Earl of Glencairn, 280. 
Cup, Covered Cup, 43. 
Cursetjee Furdoonjce Paruk, of Bombay : 

Arms, Crest, Motto, 446, 506. 
Curson, Roger, 204. 
Cushion, 43, 
Cutte, John, 366, 
Cyclas, 131. 
Cyprus : Arms, 308. 

Dabrichccourt, John de, 193. 
Dacre : Badge, 562, 284, 
Dagger, 43. 

Dagworth, Sir Nicholas, 67, 180. 
Dalling, Sir W. W., 7JL 
Dalmatic, 100. 
Dalmenhurst, 3LL 
Dalrymplo-Hay : Crests, 27.1. 
Dal ton, Sir T., 182. 

Daltou, Norroy: his Grant to Caius 

College, Cambridge, 363, 
Dampierre, Le Sicur de, 404. 
Dancette, Danse, Daunsc, 18± 43, ICQ. 
Dancettee, 80, 

Daunebrog, Order and Insignia of, 3_3_5_ ; 

Cross of, 320, 335, 355, 475. 
D'Arcy, Darcy, Sir Amory, 182. 
D'Arcy. Sir John, 122, 
D'Arcy, Norman, 177, 19JL 



D'Arcy, Philip, 176, 123, 

D'Arcy, Robert, 177^ 103. 

D'Arcy, Sir William, 182. 

D'Arcy, William, 177, 121 

Darnley, Henry Stuart, Lord, 163, 380, 
323. 

Datchct, 369. 

Daubeny : Anns, 314. 

Daubeuy, John, 45, 224. 

D'Aubcny, Sir Giles, K.G., 185, 344. 

D'Aubernoun, Sir John. 122, 287, 480, 

D'Aubernoun, Sir John, the Younger.131. 

D'Aubigne, Elys, 182. 

D'Aubigu6, Philip, 185. 

D'Aubigne, William, 1 85. 

D'Aubygn6, Sir John, 48_; his Achieve- 
ment, 134, 185, 198; Mantling, 115: 
Crest 48, 271. 

Daughters, their Arms, 137. 207. 

Daughters of Heiresses, 142. 143. 

Daughters of Peers, 111. 

Daughters of the Sovereign, 92, 253, . 

Dauphin, The : Arms and Coronet, 110 

Dauphind, Dauphiuy, 470. 

Day, John, the Printer, 320. 

Deans and Chapters : Arms, 359. 

Dcbruised, 60, 80. 

Decked, 80. 

Decies, The Baron, 00. 

Decorations of Honour, 352. 

Decrescent, 12, 71. 

Degrees, 43, 

Degreed, Degraded, 80. 

Dei r » courts : Arms, 124, 

Delabere : Crest, 272. 

Dela Mere, Abbot Thomas, 38j his 
Mitre, 118, 126, 

Dela Wane. See Wane. 

Dcmombered, Dismembered, 80. 

Demi, 80, 

Demi-Lion-rampant, 52. 

Demi-Monk : Crest of Lord Stourton.209. 

Dene, Sir Johan de, 485. 

Denmark Proper : Arms, 310. 325, 475: 
impaled by the Prince of Walt s, 32 7. 

Denmark: Arms, (a.d. 1581 ), 320 ; as 
borne by tho Princess of Wales, (a.d, 
1864 i, 326_; Chauges in, 326, 327, 
475 ; Supporters, 470 ; Cross, 320, 
475 ; Standard and Ensign, 470. 

Denmark, H.H.H., Alexandra of, The 
Princess of Wales, 31L322, 325, 326, 
475. 

Denmark, Anne of, Queen of James VI. 

and L, 25L 312. 475. 
Denmark, Christieru L, King of, 327. 

356. 

Denmark, Frederick H, King of, K.G., 
310, 322; his Garter-Plate. 326, 47JL 

Denmark, Frederick VI., King of, K.G., 
425. 



ized by Google 



518 



INULX. 



Denmark, George of, K.G., Consort of 
Queen Anno : Anns, 311. 32 7 ; 
Anns, and Label, '£j± ; Garter-Plate, 

425, 

Denmark. Margaret of, Queen of Scot- 
land : her Lozenge of Anns, \ Y H. 

Derby, Henry Plantagcnct 44 of Boling- 
broke," Earl of, 212, See Henry 1Y, 

Derby, Thomas Stanley, Earl of, 104. 

Derby, Stanleys, Earls of, 273, 2SL 

Descriptive Terms, 77, 1ML • 

Despencer, De Spencer, 32, 185, 122. 

Despeneer, Alianore, 22G. 

Despencer, Sir Hugh le, 212. 

Despencer, Isabelle, 167. 

Despencer, Henry le, Bishop of Norwich, 
218. 

Despencer, Sir Philip le, 212. 
Desj)encer, Philip le, 208. 
Developed, 80. 
Devereux : Arms, 195, 400. 
Deverose, John, 212. 
Devon, The Earls of, 216, 2£L 
Devonshire, The Duke of, 281. 
Deyville, Johan de, lflQ. 
Deyville, John de, 190. 
Dexter, 16, 12, 

Diaper, Diapering, 37, 100, 436. 

Diapered, 84L 

Diephold : Arms, 313. 

Difference, Differencing, 100, 173: De- 
finition of, 173 ; by Change of Tinc- 
tures. 17 4: various Forms and Methods 
of, 177: Early Differencing Charges, 
199; by Minor Charges, 177: by 
Single Small Charges, 200: Modem 
Differences, 206; Examples of early 
differenced Shields, 203; Accessories 
differenced, 198 ; Badges differenced, 
257. Ill; Crests differenced, 199. 
200: by a Bendlet, 235, 408; by 
Augmentation, 434. 

Digby, The Baron, 24, 

Digswell, Brasses at, 125. 394. 

Dimidiation, Dimidiating, Dimidiated, 
81. 101. liS. 

Dimidiation, in Foreign Heraldry, 467. 

Disclosed, 8JL 

Displayed, 81. 

Disponed, Disposed, 8L 

Ditzmers : Arms, 311. 

Dividing Lines, 18. 

Dobell, of Sussex : Anns, 400. 

Dolphin, 66, 148, 470. 

Dominion, Anns of, 91_, 294. 

Donoughmore, The Earl of, 67. 

Dorchester Church, 41. 

Dormant, 8_L 

Dormer, The Baron, 60. 

Dorset, Thomas Beaufort, Earl of, 248. 

Dorset, John Beaufort, Duke of, 199. 



Double Queue, 8_L 
Double Tete, 8L 
Doubling, liLL 

Douglas : Arms, 56; Changes in Arms; 

184: Badge, 262, 
Douglas, James, K.G., Earl Douglas, 

184; Crest, 69j Mantling, US. 
Douglas, " The good Sir James," 56, 
Douglas, William, Lord, 184. 
Douglas, William, 1st Earl Douglas ami 

Earl of Mar, 184; Seal, 415. 
Douglas, William, Earl of Angus, 184. 
Douglas, Margaret, Countess of Lennox, 

168, 386, 335. 
Douglas, Badge of, 202. 
Douglas- Hamilton, Duke of Hamilton : 

Crests, 224. 
Dovetail, Dovetailed, (Counter- wedg- 
ing,) 18, SL 
Downing College, Cambridge, 3M. 
Dragon, 6_7_ ; of the Saxons, 286; Badgo 

of Wales, 332j Supporter of the Tudor 

Sovereigns, 302. 
Drake : Crest, 43, 224. 
Drapers* Company : Arms, 368. 
Drawing, Heraldic, 448 : excellent Ex- 
amples of, in Moule s " Heraldry of 
•Fish," Seyton's "Scottish Heraldry" 

Laing's 44 Ancient Scottish Seals," and 

Shirley's 44 Noble and Gentle Men of 

England," 456, 491. 
Dreux, John de, Count of Brittany, 34. 

153. 208. 211. 
Drury : Arms, 335. 
Dryden, Sir Henry, 44. 
Dublin, Archbishop, and Archiepiscopal 

See of, 91, 358. 
Dublin, Robert de Vere, K.G., Marquess 

of, 117,434* 
Dublin, Albert Edward, the Prince of 

Wales, Earl of, 322, 324. 
Ducal Coronet, 101, 103, 483, See 

Crest-Coronet. 
Duchess, 103, 488. 
Dudley : Arms, 400. 
Dngdalo, Sir William, 477. 
Duke, Rank, Style and Title of, 10L 

430; his Coronet and Robes, 101, 

103, 488; Ins Sons and Daughters, 

103,430,488. 
Dunbar, Patrick of, 193, 223. 
Dunbar, the Earls of; Crest, 274. 
Dunsany, The Baron, 68. 
Dunstanville, William de, 209. 
Durham, Bishop and See of, 96. 
Durham Cathedra], 379. 
Dynevor, The Baron, 07. 
Dynham, The Lord, K.G.; Crest, 62, 

272. 

Eagle, Erne, Heraldic, 64. 



ized by Google 



INbKX. 



519 



Eagle, Drawing of the, 452; early Ex- 
amples of, 452, 464 ; of ancient Rome, 
472; of German Emperors, 234, ill ; 
of Austria, 111 ; of France, 409, 470; 
of Poland, 474; of Prussia, 472j of 
Russia, 17JL 

Eaglet, 04, 158, 

Earl, Rank, Style, and Title of, 103, 
430; his Coronet and Robes, 1U4. 
4HS; his Sons and Daughters, joi, 
430. 

Earl Marshal of England, 112, 132, 

Earl's Colne : Mullets of the De Veres 
at, 211L 

Ears of Wheat, Barley, Ac, as Charges, 
21 ; Badge of Abbot John de Wheat- 
hamstede, 453, 457. 

East India Merchants, 367, 3JHL 

Eberstein : Arms, 313. 

Ecartele, Escartele\ Quartet, 160. 

Eehebaston, Sir Ricliard dj, 201. 

Eddington, 2JLL 

Edraond " Crouchback," first Earl of 
Lancaster: Arms, 220, 234 ; Monu- 
ment, 38, 385, 382 ; Seals, 88, 220. 

Edraond, second Earl of Cornwall : 
Anns, Single Supporter, and Dimi- 
dated Shield, 146, 234, 

Edmond Plantagenet, "of Langlcy," 
K.G. : Arms, 239-241 j Badge, 431_; 
Monument, 99, 220, 385, and fully 
described, 31)0. 

Edmond, " of Woodstock," first Earl of 
Kent, 240; Arms, 225. 

Edmond, second Earl of Kent, 235. 
236. 

Edmond, "of York," Earl of Rutland; 

Aruus '24.1 2 li&gt;. 
Edmund do Holland, K.G., last Earl of 

Kent : Arms, 217. 
Edmund Tudor, "of Had ham," Earl of 

Richmond : Arms, 249. 
Edmund Beaufort. See Beaufort. 
Edward the Confessor. See Confessor. 
Edward Lj Arms, 295; Badge, 304; 

Crown, 312j Great Seal, 205, 400. 

402; Monument, 384 ; his Consort's 

Arms {1\ 157, 306, and (2) 147, 307; 

his Heraldry in Westminster Abbey, 

12,3IL 

Edward L as Prince Royal, 172, 21!', 
234. 

Edward L entitled " Prince of Wales," 

m 

Edward II.: Arms, 295 : Badge, 304; 

Crown, 98, 316, 817_; Great Seal, 153, 

295. 400; Effigy and Monument. 316. 

3H4; his Consort's Arms, iM, 307. 
Edward H. as Prince Royal, 210^ 22 1 , 

234: at Caerlaverock, 232. 



Edward ILL: Arms (before aj&gt;. 1340) » 
295. (after a.d. 1340) 158. 295. 388 • 
Crests, 266_J Badges, 304j Grea* 
Seals, 153, 295, 40J, 402j Coins, 417 : 
Standards, 28 0 ; imputed Supporters* 
302; Effigy and Monument, 92, 127. 
157. 162. 220, 237, 253. 384. described 
in full, 388 ; they are without any 
Insignia of the Garter, 343: Effigy at 
Elsyng, 161 ; his Consort's Anns, 
159, 302 ; Cadoncy of his Sons, 92, 
• 236-241. 

Edward III. as Prince Royal, 234. 

Edward III. as Earl of Chester, 234. 

Edward LYj Arms, 297_i Badges, 43, 
304 : Crown, 318 ; Supporters, 302 : 
Great Seal, 319, 401_; Seal for his 
Chancery of Monmouth, 414: his 
Consort's Arms, 165, 308 : his Charter 
to the Order of the Garter, 342, 

Edward IV. as fourth Duke of York, 
245. 

Edward V.: Arms, 297 : Supporters, 
302. 

Edward V. as Prince of Wales, 237. 250. 

259. 325, ILL 
Edward VI.: Arms, 297: Supporters, 

302: Crown, 318; Great Seal, 318; 

Badge, 305. 
Edward VI. as nominally Priuce of 

Wales, 250, 
Edward Plantagenet, K.G., Earl of 

Chester, Duke of Cornwall, and Prince 

of Wales. See Black Prince. 
Edward Plantagenet, K.G., Earl of 

Rutland, Duke of Albemarle, and 

second Duke of York : Anns, 243; his 

Consort's Arms, 243. 
Edward, Earl of Warwick, the " last of 

the Plantagenots :" Arms, 246. 
Edward, of Norfolk, only son of Earl 

Thomas "de BroOierton," 232, 410. 
Edward, K.G., Duk* of Kent, 2£L 
Effingham, Howard, Earl of. 207. 
Effingham, Charles, Lord Howard of, 

Lord High Admiral : Seal, 412. 
Egertou : Arras, 462. 
Eglinton.The Earl of, 6&amp; 
Enrenberg : Arms, 462. 
Eighth Son, his Modem Difference, 

200. 

Ela Longcspee, Countess of Salisbury : 
Seal, 403 

Eldest Son : his Modern Difference, 
206. 

Eldon, John Scott, Earl of, 207. 103, 
Eldred, John, the Navigator, 30&amp; 
Eleanor. See Alianore. 
Elected Sovereigns : Arms, 474, 478. 
Elford, 12L 205, 20L 3J1S, 

• 



Digitized by Google 



520 



INDEX. 



Elibank, Lord, 207. 

Elizabeth : Anns, 297, 325; Supporters, 
302: Bodges and Motto, 305j Crown, 
818; one of her Seals, 414 ; Coins, 
417: Funeral. 122_i Monument, 384. 
described in full, 3i»'J. 

Elizabeth Plantagenet, Countess of 
Holland, and of Hereford and Essex, 
lfiL 

Elizabeth Plantagenet, of York, Duchess 
of Suffolk, 103, 

Elizabeth Pluntagonet, of Lancaster, &lt; 
Duchess of Exeter, 247. 

EUzabcth Widville, or Woodville, Queen 
Consort of England, 'ML 

Elizabeth Plantagenet, 4, of York," 
Queen of England : Arms, 100, 308: 
Monument, 384, 387, and fully de- 
scribed, 388. 

Elizabeth, The Princess. 25L 

Elniebrygge, Roger, 67, 124* 

Elm hurst. 24. 

Eisyng, Brass at, 3^ 113, 127, 16L 235. 

m 

El th am, John of. See John. 

Ely, Bishop and See of, 352. 

Ely Cathedral, 120. 

Embattled, Battled, 7JL 8L 

Emblems, Sacred, 395; of the Evan- 

gelists, 305. 
Enibowcd, 81. 
Embrued, 81. 

Emperor, The : Arms at Westminster 
Abbey and Great Yarmouth, 452; at 
King's Langley, 453. ii'A. 

Endorse, 23, 43/ Endorsed, 

Enfield, Brass at, 114. 

Enfiled, 8_L 

England Proper : Arms, £Q_J Royal 
Arms of, 156, 295, 300, 331 ; Crest, 266, 
221 ; Supporters, 301, 303, 33L 375: 
Motto, 282, 305, 331 ; Crown, 315, 
320: Badges, 305, 322; Koyal Monu- 
ments of, 383. A 

Englethorpe, Isabel, 107. 

Engoulee', 8L. 

Engrailed, 18, SL 

Enhanced, 81. 

Ensigned, 81. 

Environneo, Environed, Enveloped, fiL 
Episcopal Arms, 144. 358. 
Equipped, 8_L 
Eradieuted, 8L 
Erased, fiL 
Erect, fiL 

Ermine, William d\ 213. 

Ermine, 20, 62, 106. 

Ermine-spots, Early Examples of, 453 ; 

for Differencing, 185. 202, 
Ermines, 20, 106. 
Erminois, 20, ML 



Erpingliam, Sir Thomas, 188, 262. 
Erpingliam Gate, Norwich Cathedral, 
188. 

Erskine, Sir Thomas: Supporters, 279; 

Crest, 265. 
Erskine : Arms, 463. 
Escallop, 66; for Differencing, 192. 
Escarbuncle, 4J, 309, 313. 
Escutcheon, 16, 106: of Pretence, 10&lt;i. 
Esquire, 106, 488. 

Esquires, of the Order of tbe Bath, 350, 
328, 

Essex, Earldom of: Arms, 151. 
Essex, Geoffrey de Mandeville, Earl of, 
41. 

Essex, Henry Bourchier, Earl of. Sea 

Bourchier. 
Essex, Isabelle Plantagenet, Countess 

of. See Eu. 
Este : Arms, 31 1. 
Estlec, Sir Nicholas, 201. 
Estoftbrd, Stafford, Robert de, 125. 
Estofford, Sir Giles, 2QL 
Estofford, Sir Robert de, 125. 
Estoilo, 43. 

Esturmy, Sir Thomas, 342, 

Eton College: Arms, 361; Grant of 

Arms from Henry VI., 364, 
Etton, De, 209, 225. 

Eu, and Essex, Henry Bourcluer, K.G., 

Earl of. See Bourchier. 
Eu, Isabelle Plantagenet, Countess of, 

105. 226. 339. 385. 394. 
Eu, Alice, Countess of, 405. 
Eureux : Anns, 166. 307. 
Evangelists, Emblems of, 305. 
Ewelme, Effigy at, 314. 
Exeter, the See and Bishops of, 53, 

532. 

Exeter Cathedral, 123, 195, 228. 
Exeter College, Oxford, 217, 36L 
Exeter, the Hollands, Dukes of, 247. 
248. 

Exeter, Cecil, the Marquess of, 28L 

Fair Rosamond, 154. 
Falcon and Fetterlock : Badge, 2&lt;;i 
Falcon and Sceptre : Badge, 306. 
Falmouth, The Viscount, Gfi. 
False, Faux, 8L 126. 
False Cross, 43. 
False Escutcheon, 43. 
False Roundlo, 40, 43, 126. 
Fan, Winnowing Fan, 43, 2S2. 
Farnham, Sir R. de, 123. 
Faroe Islands: Arms, 326, 
Fastolf, 8ir John, K.G., 192, 4fi0. 
Faucombe, De : Arms, 181. 
Faucombe, Walter de, 187 . 
Fauconberg, 459. 
Faulconbridge, Roger, 2fl 1 . 



ized by Google 



INDEX. 



,521 



Feathers, 65, 17_2_; Feathered, i£L 
Feathers, Ostrich, 72, 256, 260, 272, 
ill. 

Feathers, Panache-Plume of, 12L ML 

222. 

Felbrig, Brass at, 44, 2GL 288. 

Felbrige, George ; Arms, 204. 

Felbrigge, Sir Symon, KG. : his fine 
BruNs described, 390 ; his Banner of 
Richard II., 288jTRoy«d Badges, 43, 
261 ; his Crest, 267 ; his Insignia of 
the Garter, M± :j«L 

Feld. John, his Tabard, 82, 131, 132. 

Felton, Sir Thomas, 262 ; Helm, 2I1L 

Femme, 106- 

Fer-de-Moline, 43, 47, 270. 

Ferdinand III., King of Castile and 

Leon, 157. 
Fermaile, Fermaux, 43. 
Ferr, 43, 

Ferrara : Arms, 81L 

Ferre, Guy, 47, 1 IH. 

Ferrc, Eleanor, 148. 

Ferrers : Arms, 11*8, 215. 

Ferrers, Earls of Dorby, 46, 125. 

Ferrers, Lord, of Chartley, 72j Crest, 

121. 198, 287. 
Ferrers, Rauf de, 197. 
Ferrers. William de, 197. 
Fersficld, 454. 
Fesse, 22, 43. 
Fesse Point, 16, 11KL 
Fesse-Wise, 81. 
Fetter-Lock : Badge, 43, 2iLL 
Fictitious Heraldry, 443, iiLL 
Field, 17, 126, 

Fifth Son : his Modern Difference, 

226. 
Figured, 81. 
File, 44. 
Fillet, 22, 44. 

Filliol, Matilda, Wife of Sir 11. do, 400, 
407. 

Filliol : Arms, 402. 

Fimbriation, 28_i Fimbriated, 28, BL 

Finchley, 368. 

Finned, 82, 

Fir-Cones, 76. 

Firmee, 82. 

Fish, Heraldic, 63, 65. 
Fishmongers' Company : Anns, 368, 
Fitch ee, 29, 82. 

Fitz-Alan : Arms, 162, 115 ; Budge, 3311 ; 

Crcat. 268. 273 : Seals. 268. 272. 278. 

416: Effigies, 105, 132, 3JiiL 
Fitz-Alan, Alice de, Countess of Kent, 

242. 

Fitz-Alan, John, Earl of Arundel : 
Effigy, 132, 336j Seal, 415, 4HL 

Fitz-Alan, Thomas, Karl of Arundel, 
105. 336. 



Fitz-Alan, Richard, Earl of Arundel, 

268. 

Fitz-Alan, Thomas (or Thomas Arun- 
del), Archbishop of Canterbury, 217. 

Fitz-Alan, William, Earl of Arundel : 
Effigy of his Countess, at Arundel, 
332. 

Fitz-Alan, of Bedale, Brian, Lord : Arms, 

483, % 
Fitz-Gerald, Juliana, 147. 
Fitz-Gerald, Duke of Leinster: Arms, 

463. 

FiU-Geofrrey, 198, 214, 458. 
Fitz-Hugh, Henry, 214 ; Edmund, 216. 
Fitz-Marniaduke, John, 21 L 
Fitz-Mayhewe, 10-'. 
Fitz-Nichol, 178, 181, 192, 
Fitz-Payne, Robert le, 21L 
Fitz-Ralph, 12L 
Fitz-Randolf. 212. 
Fitz-Rauf, 128. 
Fitz Roger, Robert, 223, 452. 
Fitz-Simon, 8. le, 42j J. le, 5L 
Fitz- Walter, Robert de, 15L 2J3, 459. 
Fitz-Warren, Sir William, K.G.. 17G, 
343. 

Fitz-Waryn, William, Lord, 226, 
Fitz-Waryn, Sir John, 17JL 
Fitz-Waryn : Badge, 262. 
Fitz-William, R. de, 44, 124. 
Fitz-Gerald, Duke of Leinster: Anns, 
462. 

Fitz-William, Earl Fitz-William : Crests, 

Flag, Flags, 12, 82, 83, 280. 
Flags of England, 290, 222. 
Flags of Admirals, 22L 
Flags Military, 294. 
Flags Naval, 29Q, 
Flags of Volunteers, 222. 
Flags, Foreign. See Chapter xxxit. 
Flagon, 44. 

Flanches, 32, 3_10_i Flanchc&lt;l, 82. 
Flanders : Arras, 159, 163, 302. 
Flanders, Matilda of, The Queen, 300. 
Flasques, 32, 

Fleming, Hugh, Bishop of Lincoln, 

361. 
Fleurie, 82. 

Flcur-de-lys, 72j its origin, 72j early 
modifications of its fonn, 23 ; first ap- 
pearance on a royal Seal of France, 
73: Semde de ly$, 12, 73j dimidiated, 
148. 152 : first aptrarance in Eng- 
land, 152, 407: of France, 189; for 
differencing, 189 : drawing, and early 
examples of, 452 : no longer the he- 
raldic ensign of France, 469. 

Fleurettee, Florettee, 82. 

Flexed, 82. 

Flighted, 40, 82, 



522 



INDEX. 



Flodden Field, The Buttle of, 433, 435. 

Florin, 418. 

Flotant, 

Fly, 17, 82. 

Foix, Blanche de, 222. 

Foix, Gaston de, K.G., Count of Lon- 

gaeTUle, 22S. 
Foix, John de, K.G., Viscount Chasti- 

lion, 229. „ 
Foix, William de, 158. 
Foliated, 82. 

Fordham, Bishop John de, lift 
Fordwich, Anns of Cinque Ports at, 
149. 

Fontevraud, Royal Effigies of England 
at, 383. 

Foreign Effigies, 465. 

Foreign Heraldry, General Notice of, 
464: Characteristic Uses of, 465 ; Re- 
peated Cliarges in, 465; Use of Dimi- 
diation in, 4 67 ; Collars of Knight- 
hood in, 468 ; Use of Shields for De- 
coration in, 465 ; Labels of, 46', &gt; ; 
Lions of, 466: Mantlings of, i(Y$ ; 
Supporters of, 468. 

Foreign Nobles and their Heraldio In- 
signia, 478; their Coronets, 480; their 
Titles, 429. 

Foreign Orders, Medals and Insignia, 
122*353. 

Foreign Postage Stamps, 468. 

Formee, 29. 

Fortescue : Motto, 2S3. 

Fortibus, Aveline de, Countess of Lan- 
caster, 198, 385. 

Fortibus, William, Earl of Albemarle, 
198. 

Fotheringhay Church, Heraldry of, 377. 
Fountain, 25. 

Fourche'e, Queue Fourchoe, 44, 82. 
Fourth Son ; his Modern Difference, 
226. 

Fox, Richard, Bishop of Winchester, 

120. 36L 
Fraises, 24. 

"France Ancient," 12. 158, 189. 297, 
401, 409 : Dimidiated with England, 
147 ; with Navarre, 148: Quartered 
by Edward HL» 158, 2U5^ fine Ex- 
amples of, 236. 378. 3i£L 

M France Modern :" Adopted by French 
Kings, 159, 296: Suggested to Henry 
IV., 307 ; and adopted by him, 15!), 
297 : fine Examples of tho Quartered 
Shield, 297* 3I&amp; 393 ; Shield bearing 
the Fleurs de lys, one and two, 414 j 
Shield Quartering England and France 
Modern, 222. 

" France Recent," 462, 

France, Imperial Arms of, 460. 470 ; 
Imperial Standard of, 470: National 



Flag of, 420 ; Old Flag of. 470_; no 

longer represented by the Fleurs do 

lys, 469. 
France, Royal Cadency of, 420. 
France : Great Dignitaries and Dukes of 

the Empire ; their Arms, 470. 
France, Coronets of Nobility of, ISiL 
France, Military Medal of, 354. 
Francis, Emperor of Austria, K.G., 

421. 

FraBer, Hugh, 217- 

Fraternities of Honour, 114. 333. 

Frazer : Arms, 74. 

Frederick IL, King of Denmark and 
Norway, K.G., Arms, 310 ; Garter- 
Plate, 327, 425. 

Frederick VI, King of Denmark, K.G., 
425. 

Frederick Lewis, K.G., Prince of Wales, 
250. 

Frederick, K.G., Duke of York, 251. 
Frescbeville, Rauf, 204. 
Fresnee, 82. 

FresseL Simon de, 75, 193. 
Frette, 32j Frettee, 32. 
Friedland, Due de, 46JL 
Fructed, 82. 
Fruits, Heraldic, 76. 
Fumant, 82. 
Furnished, 82, 

FurnivaL the Brothers, 174, 1S6. 
Furs, 12. 

Fusil, 32, 44_i Fusilleo, Fusily, 35, 82. 
Fylfot, 44, 4S6. 
Fyndernc, William, 224. 

Gacelyn, Gaceline, Sir Edmund, 194, 
212. 

Gacelyn, Sir John, 124. 212. 

Gacelyn, Sir Walter, 194, 212. 

Gads, Godlyngs, 4L 

Galley, 44, 442. 

Gidtrap, jCaltrap, 4_L 

Game-cock, ILL 

Gant, William de, 212. 

Garbe, 74. 149. 446. 450. 

Gardant, Guardant, 83. 

Garde-Bras, 44. 

Garland, 44. 

Garnished, 82. 

Garshale, Thomas de, 212. 

Garter, Order of the : Foundation, 340; 
Statutes, 340 : Knights Companions, 
K.G, 340_i Insignia and Habit, 341 ; 
Badge, 34L; Collar and "George," 
341, 342: Garter, 107, 341j Motto, 
341 ; Ribbon and "Lesser George," 
342 ; Star, 341 ; Stalls in St George's 
Chapel, 340_; Garter Plates, 108, 167, 
340. 341. 378: Banners, 340: Insignia 
of deceased K.G. returned to the Sovc- 



INDEX. 



523 



reign, 343; Insignia marshalled, 171 ; 
Examples of early Effigies of K.G. 
having Insignia of the Order, 343; 
Officers of the Order, and their In- 
signia, 342. 343: no Esquires of the 
Order, 488; Ludies associated with 
the Order, ML 
Garter King-of-Arms, UL 112, 3£L 
343; his Arms, 160, 365; Badge, 
343. 

Gasooyne Cecil, Marquis of Salisbury, 
207. 28L 

Gaston, Viscount de Beam, 157, 158. 
Gaveston, Sir Arnold de, 157. 158. 
Gaveston, Piers de, Earl of Cornwall, 

157. 153. 
Genealogies, 422. 

Genealogies, Historical ; their utility and 
value, 423 : System of framing them, 
423 ; Abbreviations, illustrations, and 
general suggestions for framing them, 
423. 424; Examples, 425—427. 

Genet, 332, 

Geneville, de. Lords of Broyes: Arms, 

41, 60j their Cadency, 175, 212. 
Geoffrey, Count of Anjou, 3U3, 3S3, 4M ; 

Arms, 392. 
George L : Arms, 299. 300 ; Arms of his 

Consort, 311 ; he changes the colour 

of the Ribbon of the Order of the 

Gorier, 341, 342. 
George II. : Arms, 290, 300j Arms of 

bis Consort, 312 ; as Prince of Wales, 

250. 

George III. : Arms, 299, 300; Arms of 
his Consort, 312; as Prince of Wales, 
230 ; Cadency of the Princes and 
Princesses of his Family, 25L 

George IV. : Arms, 299, 300: Arms of 
his Consort, 312, 313j as Prince of 
Wales, 250 ; Anns of the Princess of 
Wales, his only child, 25iL 

George Plantagenet, K.G., Duke of 
Clarence, Earl of Warwick and Salis- 
bury : Arms, 222, 246; Crest, 266: 
Mantling, 115; Seal, 2I8j Anna of 
his Consort, 24fL 

George, of Denmark, K.G., 251. 311 ; 
Garter Plate, 425. 

• George," The, of the Order of the 
Garter, 242, 

George-Noble (coin), 417. 

Gerard, Peter, 132. 

Gerattyng, 82, 199. 

Germany : Anus, 307. 

Germany, Emperors of, 471, 472. 

Germany, Heraldry of, 464 ; its Usages, 
466,462. 

Ghent, John of. See John. 

Giffard, Sir Alexander ; his Cross-legged 
Effigy and Shield of Arms, 225, 



Giflard, Sir John ; his Brass and Shield 

of Arms, 190. 
Giffard, Margaret: Seal, 122. 
Giffard, Sir John : Arms, 152. 
Gifford : Arms, 52. 
Gillyflower, 74. 
Gimmel-ring, 44, 203. 
Girt, Girded; 82. 
Glay, De, of Inner wick, 217. 
Glendour : Arms, 460. 
Glendwyr, Owen, Prince of Wales, 3_2iL 
Gliding. 82, 

Globe, The Terrestrial, 44, 

Gloucester Cathedral, Effigy of Edward 

H. in, 98, 316j 376_i Heraldic Tiles 

in, 384. 

Gloucester, See and Bishop of, 359, 
Gloucester, Humphrey Plantagenet 

Duke of. See Humphrey. 
Gloucester, Richard Plantagenet, Duko 

of. See Richard III. 
Gloucester, Thomas Plantagenet, Duke 

of. See Thomas. 
Gloucester, William Stuart, ICG., Duko 

of, 251, 

Gloucester, William Henry, K.G., Duke 
of, 2SL 

Gloucester, William Frederick, K.G., 

Duke of, 252. 
Gobony, Compony, 82. 
Gold, 111 

Golden Fleece, Order and Insignia of, 

355. 478. 
Goldsmiths' Company, 369. 
Gonaldston, Effigy at, 125. 
Gonfannon, 108. 

Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge : 
Arms, and original Grant, 363. 

Goodryke, Thomas, Bishop of Ely, 121L 

"Good Service Medals," 353. 

Gordon : Badge, 262. 

Gorge, Gurge, 45, 

Gorged, 82, 

Gorges, R. de, 45, 127. 

Gorget, 109. 

Gorleston, Brass at, 212. 

Gothic Architecture essentially heraldic, 
272. 

Gouttec.Gutt^e.delarmcs.d'azure, d'eau, 
d'olive, d'or, de poix, du sang, 77, 82, 

Gouttee, reversed, 77, 82. 

Gower, John, 336. 461. 

Gower : Arms quartered by the Duke of 
Sutherland , 462. 

Gradient, 82. 

Grafted, 82. 

Grafton, the Duke of, 43£. 
Grafton Regis, 27L 

Graham : Arms, 66, 192, 2KL; Badge, 
263. 

Graham, I&gt;ukc of Montrose, i&lt;i^ 



Digitized by Google 



524 INDEX. 



Grandison : Arms, 211 ; Canton of, 200. 
Grandison, Bishop John dc, 2JLL 
Grandison, William de, 211, 
Grand Quarters, 10, 108. 
Granville: Arm 4^ 462. 
Granville-Leveson-Gower, Duke of Su- 
therland, n;-j, 
Graveney, Brans at, ILL 
Great Britain, Ensign of, 22, 
Gretit Malvern, 45, 53, 396, 
Great Saxham, 31&amp; 

Great Seals, 311), 399, 400_; described, 
295. 290. 299. 401; Obverse, 401; 
of the Common wealth, 102; of Princes 
and NoU.m. 402, JJ2_; of John, - of 
Ghent," 4112 ; of Thomas, second Earl 
of Lancaster, 402 ; of Thomas, Duke 
of Gloucester, 403, 

Great Yarmouth : Arms, 148 ; Seal, 413. 

Great Yarmouth, Shield* of Arms in the 
Parish Church of. 149. 218. 222. 239, 
242. 377. 

Greece ; Arms, Supporters, Motto, En- 
sign, ill. 
Groeces, 45. 
Greek Cross, 20. 
Green : Arms, 310. 
Greenland : Arms, 320. 
Greilly, John de, Captal de Buch, 229, 
Grenada, 308. 

Grevel, William ; his fine Brass, 118. 

Grey, Sir Anthony, 332, 

Grey, De : Arms, 35, 

Grey, the Lady Jane, Queen, 423. 425. 

Grey, the Lady Mary, 423. 

Grey, Walter, Archbishop of York, 100. 

Grey, John de, 211. 

Grey, Richard de, 224. 

Grey, Thomaa.'K.G., Marquess of Dorset, 

m 

Grey, Roger, Lord, of Ruthyn, 389 ; 

Badge, 2g2, 
Griffin, Gryphon, 67, 150. 
Grimstone, Sir Edward, IRS. 
Grimstone, Earl of Verulam, 185. 
Grocers' Company, 308. 
Gros, Sir Renard lo, 187. 
Grosvenor, Sir Robert, 210. 
Gryphon, Coward, 67. 
Gueldres : Arms, l(i3. 
Gueldres, Mary of, 278. 
"Guide to the Study of Heraldry," 

Montagu's, Reference to, 402, 
Guige, 15. 
Guildford, 358, 
Guilds : Arms, 307. 
Gules, 19, 108. 
Gunby, Brass at, 18£, 2U1L 
Gwilt, Mr., his Ordinary of the Arms 

in the Roll of Henry III., edited by 

Sir Harris Nicholas, 482, 



Gyron, 31j Gyronny, Gyronnce, 35, 82 

Haberdashers' Company, 309. 
Habited, 12, 82, 
Hackle, 45. 

Hadfield, Hatfield, Bishop Thomas : his 
Monument in Durham Cathedral, 119. 
379. 

Hainault. See Philippe. 
Hukebut, Richard, 190. 
Halberstadt ; Arms, 312. 
Hallam; Robert, Bishop of Salisbury, 
107. 

Haltwhistle, 48, 
Hamburgh Merchants, 307. 
Hameldene, Lawrence, 191. 
I lames, Heames, 45. 
Hamilton, of Innerwick, 217. 
Hammer, 45, 125, 

Hammer-Beams, with Shields of Arms, 

in Westminster Hall, 490. 
Hammerton : Rebus, 125. 
Hampson, Sir G. F., 45. 
Hampton Court Palace, 129, 309, 
Hands, Human, 56, 125. 
Hanover : Arms, Ensign, and National 

Colours, 470. 
Hanover, Royal Family of the House of, 

299. 

Hanover, Electoral Bonnet of, 250. 
Hapsburgh, Arms of the House of, 
421. 

Harcourt, Thomas de Beaufort, K.G., 

Earl of, 248. 
Harcourt, Sir Robert, K.G., 108, 339, 

344; Mantling, LL5, 
Harcourt, Lady, 108, 344. 
Harcourt, Sir John (two Coats), 125. 
Hardinge ; Crest, 273. 
Harford, Anthony, 2HL 
Harford, with Canton of Scropo, 2 1 0. 
Harp, 45j Badge of Ireland, 322. 
Harpedene, Sir John de, 180. 204. 
Harpedene, Sir William de, 204. 
Harp ham, Brasses at, 182,214, 270. 
Harpur Crewe : Arms, 220. 
Harpy, 67. 
Harris, 125, 4G_L 

Harsnett, Archbishop Samuel, 119. 
Harsyck, Sir Thomas : Arms and Crest, 

72, 115, 121j Crest and Wreath, 134, 

204. 

Hart. 03, 125 ; Crest of Ireland, 332 ; 
Badge of Henry, of Bolingbroke, 258 ; 
Badge of Richard 1L, 263, 278, 304, 
454. 

Hastings : Arms. 47, 151 ; Labels, 176; 
Badges, 262, 284, 

Hastings, Sir Hugh, 38, 287 ; his Brass, 
161, 388: Crest, WreathTand Mant- 
ling, 115, 134, 



Digitized by Google 



INDIA'. 



Hastings, John do, K.G., Earl of Pem- 
broke, 101 ; bis Surcoat, 113; Shield, 
122. 

Hastings, John do ; his Bordure of 
Valence. 215. 

Hastings, Ijiwrence de ; Earl of Pem- 
broke, 3s'. ». 

Hastings, the Earl ; his Banner at Caer- 
laverock, 17 'J. 

Hastings, Edmund dc, his Banner at 
Caerlavcrock, 17JL 

Hnstings, William, K.G., Lord ; his 
Mantling, 110. 

Hatchet, Wk 

Hatchment, 108: Modern, 444; exem- 
plification of HeralcUc Debasement, 
445, 456. 

Hatfield Broadoak, 38, 

Haughton, HJ. 

Haurient, 66, 82, 

Hiiuse, S3. 

Hautevillo, Geoffrey de, 1S2. 
Hawberk, Sir Nicholas ; Figure of St. 

George in his Brass, 127. 
Hawk, 215. 

Hawk's Lure, 45; Bell and Jesses. 45. 

Hawkestone, Sir T., 198. 

Hay, Jean dc la, 7_L 

Hay, Rauf dc la, IL 

Haydon, John, P.)4. 

Hazel Leaves, 74. 

Hazelrigg, IL 

Hedgehog. Herrison, 125» 

Heightened, 82, 

Heir, Arms of, 137. 

Heiress and Co-heiresses, Arms of, 140. 
ILL 

Heiress, Husband of, 142. 

Heiress, Son of, 140 ; Daughters of, 143. 

Helena, H.R.H., the Prineess, 252, 33L 

Helm, Heaurae, Helmet, 45, 109 ; 
Modern, 1 09 : in Blazon, 17J : Draw- 
ing of, 454 ; lino Examples of, 455. 

Hcmenhale, Sir K. dc, 1112. 

Hemp-brake, Hackle, 15. 

Heneage-knot, 284. 

Henlington, of Gloucestershire : Arms, 
401. 

Henneburgb, 313. 
Henniker, the Baron, 283. 
Henrietta Maria, Queen Consort of Eng- 
land, 3JLL 

Henry L_I Arms, 295 ; Arms of Consort, 

300. 

Henry ILj Arms, 295 ; Crown, 315: 
Badges, 304: Effigy, 383; Arms of 
Consort, liOiL 

Henry IIL : Arais,295j Crown, 61.316; 
Badge, 301 : his Heraldry in West- 
minster Abbey, 12, 377: the Era of 
true Heraldry in England commences 



with his Reign, 4_; the existing Rolls 
of Anns of his Period, 4H1 ; his Great 
Seals, 10_0_ ; his Monument and Efllgy, 
38, 384 ; Arms of Consort, 306. 
Henry IV., — Henry Plantagenet, "of 
Bolingbroke" : Roval Arms, 297 ; 
Quarters " France Modern," 73, 180, 
2112 ; Crown. 3_liL 3]7_; Royal Budges, 
304 ; attributed Supporters. 302 ; 
Great Seals, 4iil ; Secretum, 258; his 
heraldic Slab at Venice, 258 ; Monu- 
ment and Effigy at Canterbury, 100, 
165. 384. 486: fully described, 3T7. 
3iil ; Arms of his Queen, 4_L 106, 307, 
337. 

Henry IV., before his Accession, as Earl 
of Derby and Hereford, and Duke of 
Hereford and Lancaster : Arras, 104, 
221. 242 : Badge, 25J_; Standard, 286; 
Arms of Consort, pi4. 

Henry V. : Arms, 297_; Crown, 318,319; 
Badges, 40, 30L 377, 321 ; attributed 
Supporters, 302 ; Monument, 384 ; 
Arms of Consort, 307 : his Standard- 
Bearer, 383, 394 ; as Prince of Wales, 
116. 230 f 237. 

Henry VI. : Arms, 165, 297; Crown, Ulli ; 
Supporters, 302: Badges, 304: Motto, 
304 ; Coins, 417: Arms of Consort, 
307. 308; his Grants of Arms to Eton 
and King's Colleges, 303, 3fiL 

Henry VII. : Arms, 297_, 378; Crown, 
318. 319; Supporters, 302_; Badges, 
3it7 : Great Seals, 401_; Coins, 417: 
Arms of Consort, 166,308 : his Chapel 
at Westminster, with his Monument 
and Effigy, 7.0, 129, 100, 260, 350, 
378, 384 : his Armorial Insignia at 
King's Chapel, Cambridge, 378. 

Henry VI L, before his Accession, as 
Earl of Richmond, 249. 

Henry VIII. : Arms, 297; Crown, 319; 
Supporters. 302 : Badges. 305 : Great 
Seals, 401 ; Coins, 417: Grants aud 
Augmentations, 105, -131 ; Arms of 
Consorts, 308-310; their Badges, 305. 

Henry VI H., before his Accession, as 
Duko of York, 249 ; as Prince of 
Wales, 250. 

Henry Plantagenet, Third Earl of Lan- 
caster, 235_; Seals, 173. 397. 408. 

Henry Plantagenet, Fourth Earl and 
First Duke of Lancaster, the Second 
English Duke, PH. 2li5_; his Efligy 
at Elsyng, 113_i Seals, 278, 1118. 

Henry Stuart, K.G., Prince of Wales, 
250. 2S0_. 

Henry II., King of France, K.G , 471. 
Hepburn : Arms, 16Ji ; Mott&lt;\ 
Herald, Heralds. HO, LLL; their Offi- 
cial Habit, 112_; Duties 112^ 439_J 



ized by Google 



526 



INDKX. 



Titles, 111 ; Modern, their varied 
and important Duties, and their Offi- 
cial Authority and Rights, 439, 444. 

Heralds, Kings-of-Arms, 111. 1 Hi ; their 
Arms, 144. 868 ; Crowns, 112 ; Badge 
of (iartor, m 

Herald's College, College of Arms, 111 ; 
Arms of, 112, 364, 422_i Crest, 364: 
Supporters, 304. 

Heralds, and Heralds' Office, or Lyon 
Office, of Scotland, 112, 3111 

" Herald and Genealogist," References 
to, 193, 200. 

Heraldic Art, the Study of, 449; early 
Illustrations of, 448. 

Heraldic Character of Early Monuments, 
381. 

" Heraldic Debasement," 442 ; specially 
exemplified in Modern Hatchments, 

4-ffi. 

Heraldic Character of Gothic Architect- 
ure, 373, 325. 

Heraldic Jewellery, 441. 

Heraldic Treatment, Drawing and 
Colour, 4 is. 

Heraldic Terms in Rolls of Arms, 483, 
487. 

Heraldic Materials prepared by Winsor 

and Newton, 457. 
Heraldic Sails, 288. 

Heraldry, Definition of, 5j Language, 
8 ; Nomenclature, 9_; Abbreviation 
and Punctuation, 10 ; Law of Tinc- 
tures, 11, 465j Epithets, 12_; Shields, 
13,440. 

Heraldry, an Art, 448 : of Architecture, 
373: of the Cathedrals, 377: a Chro- 
uicler, 375: of Coins, 416; of Cos- 
tume, 114, 383; Debasement of, 442. 
456; Foreign, 464: of France, 464. 
471: of Germany, 404, 4G9_; of Illu- 
minations, 419; of Inlaid Pavements, 
376: of Monuments, 380; Official and 
Corporate, 357: of Paving Tiles, 376: 
of Seals, 397; of Stained Glass, 376. 

Heraldry, in Alliance with Gothic 
Architecture, 372. 373; its Claims on 
Gothic Architects, 375. 

Heraldry, Modern, 439; its true Charac- 
ter and Dignity, 440; Use of Badges 
in, 411 ; Examples of the True, 444 ■ 
Cadency in, 443; Pseudo-Heralds 
and Fictitious Heraldry, 443, 444, 
491 : "Pictorial," 441: Examples 
from the " Peerage," 441 ; from other 
Sources, 442; of tho New Palace at 
Westminster, 441 ; a Plea for its 
Nobleness, 445. 

Heraldry, Treatises on. Authorities and 
Writers, 481—485. 

"Heraldry of Fish," by Mr. Moule, 



illustrated by Miss Barbara Moule, 
a Model Treatise on Heraldry, 00, 
209, 450. 

Hereford Cathedral, 267. 343. 

Hereford, Bishops and See of, 63, 352. 

Hereford, Earls of. Sa Bohuu. 

Heriz, De ; Rebus, 125: Arms, 416. 

Heron : Arms, 204, 4SL 

Heron, Gerard, John, Walter, and Wil- 
liam, 204, 

Heron's Head ; Crest, 262. 

Herteley, De : Rebus, 125. 

Hesse : Arms, 331. 

Hesse-Darmstadt, 331, 476. 

Hever, Brass at, 105, Mi. 

Hewes, Thomas de, 

Heytesbury : Arms, 410. 

Heyworth : Arms, 454. 

High Admirals, Seals of, 412. 

Higham Ferrers, 368. 

Hildersham, Brass at, 193. 

Hill, Hillock, 24. 

Hillingdon, Brass at, 335. 

Hilted, 82. 

Hilton, Sir William de, 401. 
Hinckley, the Honour of, 288. 
Hind, 03, 2JJL 
Hohenstaufcr : Arms, 422. 
Hohenzollern : Arms, 312, 423. 
Hohenzollern, John George, Prince of, 
413, 

Hohnstein : Arms, 313. 
Hoist, VL 82. 
Hcja : Arms, 313. 
Holly-Leaves, 74, 31L 
Holy Trinity, Shield Emblematic of, 395. 
Holland, the Countess of, 159 ; Arms, 
163. 

Holland, the Kingdom of : Arms, Sup- 
porters, Standard and Flag, 477. 

Holland Ancient, 190, 459. 

Holland, Edmund de, E.G., Fourth Earl 
of Kent, 242. 

Holland, Robert de, 247. 

Holland, Margaret, de, Duchess of 
Clarence, 244. 

Holland, Matilda de, Countess of Devon, 
227. 

Holland, Otho de, E.G., 190. 202. 242. 
Holland, Sir Thomas, K.G., 190, 202. 
240,242. 

Holland, Thomas de, K.G., Second Earl 
of Kent : Arms, 126, 247j Seals, 103, 
277. 409: Supporter. 277, 402. 

Holland, Thomas de, Third Earl of Kent 
and Duke of Surrey, 247_i Seal, 409. 

Holland, John de, K.G., Earl of Hun- 
tingdon and Duke of Exeter, 247: 
Seals, 412j Heraldic Sail, 412. 

Holland, John de, K.G., Second Diikf» 
of Exeter and Earl of Huntingdon, 24S. 



INDEX. 



527 



Holland, John do, Third and last Dnke 

of Exeter, 248, 
Hollands, de, their Cadency, 247 ; their 

Shields of Arms at King's Langley, 

840. 

Holstein : Arms, 311. 
Homberg : Arms, 313. 
Home : Motto, 28_L 

Honour, Augmentations of, 03, 1G5, 309, 
433. 

Honour, Decorations of, 352. 

Honour Point, 16, 113. 

"Honours," the, of Regimental Colours, 

125. 

Honourable Insignia marshalled, 172. 

Hoo, Thomas, 07. 

Hood ; Motto, 283. 

Hooded, 83- 

Hoofed, 83. 

Horned, 83. 

Horse-shoe, 4G, 125. 

Horn ted Keynes, 187. 

Hospitallers, Knights, 28, 113, 323, 

Hoveringham, 336, SAL 

Howard: Arms, 112; Original Anns, 
I S3: "Ancient," 434; Differencial, 
2o:&gt; ; "Modern," 433, 434, 4J_3j 
Badge, 262; Crest, 213 ; Lion, iLl 

Howard, Katharine, Queen Consort of 
England, 3JJL 

Howard, Elizabeth de, 107. 

Howard, Thomns, Duke of Norfolk, Aug- 
mentation of his Arms, 433. 

Howard, Charles, Lord, of Effingham, 
High Admiral : Seal, 412. 

Howard, Charles, 205, 

Howden, Effigy at, 182. 

Human Beings, 551. 

Humettee, 82. 

Humphrey Plantagenet, K.G., Dnke of 
Gloucester : Arms, 254 ; Arms of Con- 
sorts, 254 ; Monument at St A loan's, 
254. 385. 413. 

Hungary : Anns, 307. 472 : Supporters, 
Crown, and National Colours, 472. 

Huugerford : Badge, 262, 410. 

Hungerford, Robert, Lord, 336. 

Hungerford, Sir Robert de, 202, 411. 

Hungerford, Margaret de : Seal, 411. 

Hungerford, 8irThomas, first " Speaker," 
ILL 

Hungerford, Walter, Ix&gt;rd, 410. 
Huntingdon, John Holland, Earl of, 
241. 

Hunting Horn, 4H 
Hunton, Prior : Rebus, 123, 
Hurst, 74. 

Hursthelve, William de, 45. 
II arte. 46; Hurtee, 83. 
Husband and Wife, Arms of, 130. 
HiiHsey : Arms, 410. 



Hussey, Joan do, 411. 

Ibex, Heraldic Antelope, 6JL 
Iceland : Arms, 324L 
" Ich Dien," 12. 

Illegitimacy, Abatement of, 436 ; not 
necessarily hereditary, 438. 

Illumination, 113; Heraldry of, 419. 

Illumination, Manual of, 113. 

Illumination, Revival of the Art, 419 ; 
Suggestion for present Practice, 420 ; 
modern Varieties, 420 ; Advantage of 
Heraldry, 421 ; good Subjects, 421 : 
Outlines, 421. 

Imaginary Beings, GO. 

ImbattkxC Embattled. 18. 

Imbrued, Imbued, 83. 

Impalement, Impaled, 16, 83, 113 ; Ex- 
amples of, 139 — 161 ; of Bordure and 
Treasure, 32, 113: as first used, LiiL 

Imperially crowned, 83. 

In Bend, 24, 84, 

In Chevron, 24, 84, 

In Chief, 24, 8L 

In Cross, 24, 30, 84, 

In Fesse, 24, 84. 

In Foliage, 84, 

In Glory, 12, 8_L 

In Lure, 84. 

In Orle, 32, 

In Pale, 24, 84. 

In Pile, 24, 84, 

In Pretence, BL 

In Pride, 64, 84. 

In Quadrangle, 84. 

In Saltire, 24. 84, 

In Splendour, 84. 

Incensed, 84, 

Increment, Increscent, 12. 71. 84. 
Indented, 18, 84. 

India, Grants of Arms to Native Gentle- 
men of, *4fi, 
Inetjcutcheon, 16, 3L 
Inflamed, 84, 
Ingham, 335. 

Inheritance of Arms, 135, 136. 
Inner Temple, Barristers of the : Badge, 
334. 

Insects, Heraldic, 63, 

Institutions and Associations: Anns, 1 45. 

Interlaced, St. 

International Exhibition of 1862, 450, 
Invectod, 18, 84. 
Inverted, 84. 
Iona, 46, 

Ipswich: Arms, 149. 

Ipswich, Brasses at, 49, 118. 

Ireland : Arms, 393; Arms assigned to, 
434: Badges, 332; National Devices, 
27, 45, 75; Crest, 332j the Anns 
quartered in the Royal Shield of 



INDEX. 



England, 299 ; included iu the 
Union Jack," 27, 220. 
Ireland, Bishops of, 9JL 
Ironmongers' Company and Hall, 53, 

ma. 

Irradiated, 84. 

lealxjl, of Angoulcmc, Queen Consort of 

England, Anns, 300, 385. 
Isabelle, of France, Queen Consort of 

England, 4JiL; Arms, 134, 152. l'&gt;8, 

307. 

Isabel, of Franco, Queen Consort of 

England, Arms, 1GG. 31)7. 
Isabollo Plantagenet, Countess of Essex 

and Eu. 220; her Coronet, 105 ; lier 

Brass, 339, 285. -See Henry Bour- 

chier, Earl of Essex. 
Islay, Scottish Herald, 112. 
Isles, Lord of the, 322, 324. 
Isle of Man : Arms, 66, 487. 
Islip. Abbot : Rebus, 124. 
Issuant, 84, 

Italy : Arms and Royal Standard, 477. 

Jacqueline, of Holland, Duchess of 
Gloucester, 245. 

Jacqueline, of Luxemburgh, Duchess of 
Bedford, 244. 

James L, of Great Britain : Arms, 208 ; 
Crown, 319_i Budges, 305j Crest of 
Scotland, 415: Supporters, 280 : 
Motto, 394 : Coins, 418: Arms of 
Consort, 311 ; institutes Baronets, 94j 
his Shield at Westminster, 393. 

James II., of Great Britain : Arms, 298 ; 
Badges, 305: Supporters, 303; Arms 
of Consort, 3J_L 

James II. as Duke of York, 251. 

James L_, of Scotland : Sec return, 280, 
114. 

James II., of Scotland : Seal of his 

Queen, B32. 
James III., of Scotland : Lozenge -of- 

Arms of his Queen, 327. 
James IV. of Scotland : Crest of Scotland 

on his Great Seal, 414 ; his Death at 

Flodden, 433. 
James V. of Scotland : Great Seal and 

Garter-Plato, 114. 
Jane (the Lady Jane Grey , Queen of 

England, 423,125. 
Jane Seymour, Queen Consort of 

England : Arms, 309: Badge, 305, 
Jaspar Tudor. See Tudor. 
Javelin, 16. 

Jerusalem, Crusader Kings of: Arms, 
8, LL 

Jerusalem : Arms, quartered by Margnrct 
of A njou, 307 : Arms, modified, borne 
by Lewis do Beaumont, Bishop of 
Durliam, 219. 



Jerusalem, Knights of St. John of, 322. 
Jessant, Jessant de lys, 63, 84. 
Jesses, Jessed, 40, &amp;L 
Jesus College, Oxford, 362. 
Jesus College, Cambridge, 363. 
Jewel. See Badge. 

Joan, Joanna of Navarre, Queen Consort 

of England : Arms, 42. 105. 160. 201 ; 

Monument and its Heraldry, 337. 

884, 29J ; her Collar of SS., 336. 
Joan, second Daughter of Edward I.. 

Countess of Gloucester, 40fi 
Joan, " of Kent," first Princess of Wales, 

236 (See Corrigenda, p. 547), 240. 

217. 

Joan De Barr, Countess of Surrey ; Seal, 
150.105. 

John, King of England : Arms. 225 ; 
Crown. 315: Badge. 304 ; Great Seal, 
295 : Monument and Effigy in Wor- 
cester Cathedral, 384. 

John, " of Eltham," Earl of Cornwall : 
Arms, 154, 214, 23_5j Effigy, 131 : 
Basinet, 101 ; Monument, 285. 

John Plantagenet, "of Ghent," K.G., 
Duke of Lancaster, King of Castile 
and Leon: Arms, 239; Badges, 48. 
201 ; Great Seal, 402j 8eals, 164, 
261. 278 : Arms of Consorts, 231L 

John Plantagenet, K.G., Duke of Bed- 
ford, &amp;c. : Arras, 24Jj Label, 222, 
229; Crest, 266; Arms of Consorts. 
214. 

John, Third Earl of Kent, 236. 
John, King of Bohemia, 257. 165, 
John, King of France, 434. 
John George, Duke of Saxony, K.G., 
427, 

Johnstone, Sir W. B. . 68. 

Jousts, 112. 

Jowlopped, 84. 

Juliers : Arms, 212. 

Jupon, 113* 13L 

Jutland : Arms, 310, 

Juxon, Archbishop : Arms, 56. 

Keith, Earl of Kintore, 425. 
Kempe, John, Archbishop of Canter- 
bury, 96. 

Kendall, Johu Plantagenet, Earl of. 

See John, Duke of Bedford. 
Kendall, John de Foix, Earl of, 222. 
Kendall, E. de, 216. 
Kent, Hubert de Burgh, Earl of: Seal, 

192. 

Kent, Joan of. See Joan. 

Kent, Edmond, Edmond and John, 

Earls of. See Edmond, Edmond and 

John. 

Kent, the Hollands. Earls of. See Hol- 
land. 



INDEX. 



Kemson, Sir Edward, 99 ; Blazon of 
his Anus from the " Baronetage," 44 2. 
Key, 4JL 

Kilfano. Effigy at. 

Kings-of-Arms, 111. 1 13 ; Ann*, 365 ; 

Crown, 357. 
King' sCoIlegc, Cambridge: Anns, 363. 
King's College Chapel, Cambridge. Hc- 

raldy of, 76, l£L 309, 377, 378; j 

Noble Examples of Heraldic Animals 

at, 454. 

King's Langley, Plantagenet Monument j 
at, 99. 162, 239, 385. 390: Labels of | 
Plantagenet Shields. 222 : Verney 
Monument at, 205. 

Kintore, The Earl of, 435. 

Kirkham Priory Gateway, 379. 

Kirkpatrick, 43, 

Kirkpatrick, of Closeburn : Crest, 274. 

Knights, 113, 333: Bannerets, 114,489; 
Commanders of the Bath, 347 : of ] 
the Garter, 341 ; their Precedence, 
343: Grand Cross of the Bath, 347 ; 
Hospitallers, 28, 333: of St Michael 
and St. George. 350: of St. Patrick, | 
345. (HI ; of the Stir of India. 
Templars,- 28, 334j of the Thistle. 
345 ; of Foreign Onlers of Knight- 
hood, 353, 468. 

Knights of Orders ; Marshalling of their 
Anns, 168, 17L 408. 

Knolles, Robert, 19L 

Knots, 46^ 284. 

Kydesbye, Sir William, 214. 

Kvriell, Sir Thomas, his Royal Canton, 
"209. 

Kyriell, John, 202. 
Kyrkeby, Richard de, 200. 

I 

Labarte, his " Handbook of Archae- 
ology," 384. 

Label, 33, 4fi_; for Differencing, 205: 
Cadency marked by, 219 ; of Modern 
Cadency, 2113. 

Labels, Early ; their Form and Blazon, 
220: Points, 220; Various Forms. 1 
445: Differenced, 221 ; Examples. 
223: in Roll of Henry IN., 222; in 
Cierlaveroek Roll, 223 : in Calais Roll, 
223. 

labels of Wales, 236, 250; of France, 
242: of Lancaster, 244 : of York, 
210 ; of Brittany, 239 : of Neville, 
203 ; of T/&gt;nge«pee. 221. 

Labels borne as Charges, 461. 46D. 

Labels in Foreign Heraldry, 469. 

Laci, Lacy. De : Arms, 25, 1£2_ 

Laci, 8ir John de, 187, 219. 220, 223. 

Laci, Henry de. Enrl of Lincoln : Seals, 
401,412; Banner, 288, 485. 

Uejr Knot. 2H_L 



Lung, Mr. J. J.; his " Munual of Illu- 
mination," 113. 

Laing's M Catalogue of Ancient Scottish 
Seals," 330: its Excellence and Value, 
and the admirable Drawing of the 
Examples, 401 ; the Second Series. 491. 

Lambrequin, 1 14. 

Laminated, Scaled, 84. 

Lancaster, Aveline, Countess of, 198. 
385. 

Lancaster, Blanche, of, Duchess of Lan- 
caster, 232. 

Lancaster, Edmund, First Earl of, 234. 

Lancaster, Thomas, Second Earl of, 235. 
267,402. 

Lancaster, Henry, Third Earl of, 235, 
408. 

Lancaster. Henry, Fourth Earl and First 

Duke of, 235, 408. 
Lancaster, John, " of Glient," Second 

Duke of, 48, 232. 
Lancaster, Henry, " of Bolingbroke," 

Third Duke of, 16J, 242. 
Lancaster, Collar of SS. of, 331 : Rose, 

75, 76, 260. 303. 304. 305. 
Lancaster, John dc, 209. 
Lancaster, William de, 209. 
Lancaster. Sir Thomas, 199. 
Lancaster Herald, 111. 
Landesberg : Arms, 313. 
Landseer, Sir Edwin, R.A., 375. 
Lane, of Bentley, 435. 
Lane, Jane, 435. 
Ijanenburg. 326. 
Langforde, Sir Nicholas, 212. 
Langley, Edmond, of. See Edmond. 
Langley, Bishop Thomas, 205, 
Langton, Bishop : Rebus, L23. 
Langued, 85. 

Lansdowne, The Marquess of, 273. 
Laonis. See Lothian. 
Lascelles. Roger de, 407. 
Latham, Lathora : Arms, 460. 
Latham, Sir Thomas, 105. 
Latin Cross, 20. 
Latton, Brass at, 197, 20A 
Latymer, Lord. See Neville. 
Latymer, Thomas le, 228. 
Latymer. William le, 228. 
Laurel Leaves, 4. 125. 
Lauterbergh, 313. 

" Law and Practice of Heraldry in Scot- 
land," by Mr. Seton, a tmly Heraldic 
and truly admirable Work. 415. 450. 

" Law and Practice of Scottish Peerages." 
by Mr. Riddell, 193. 

Law and Usage of Inheritance of Armo- 
rial Iusignia, 132. 

Lawrence, Sir John, 100- 

Leake, Garter : his Tracings of Garter- 
Plates. 130, 



INDEX. 



Leash, liL 
IiCfivea, 71. 

Leeds, tlio Duke of, 27JL 
Legged, Membered, 85. 
Legion f»f Honour, of France, 351. 
I-^gs, Human, 54_; of Animals, uiL 
Leicester, Simon do Montfort, Earl of, 
288. 

Leinstcr, the Duke of, 162. 

Lennox, Margaret Douglas, Countess of : 

Seal, Ilia; Monument, 38G: Shields 

of Arms on her Monument, 184 ; 

Lozenge of Arms on her Monument, 

304. 

Leopard, 57_i the Term still applied to 
the Lion Passant by French Heralds, 
182. 

Leopold, H.R.H.. the Prince. 252, 33L 
Leopold, the King of the Belgians, K.G., 

250, 1IL 
Leslie, Bartholomew, 283. 
Leslie, Euphemia, Countess of Boss, 222, 
Leslie, Walter, L"rd,of Boss : Seal, 4 1 5. 
L'Espan, near Mans, 383. 
" Lesser George," of tho Order of the 

Garter, 342, 
I/Estrange, Strang. Ix? Strange : Anns, 

57, 152. 
L* Estrange, Boger, 215. 
Letters of the Alphabet, bonio as 

Charges, 46, MUh 
Levant or Turkey Merchants, 3t&gt;8. 
Leventhorjte, Thomas, 242, 387. 
Leveson : Arms, 70, 7jL 125, 162. 
Levbourne, Leyburn, Leyburne : Arms, 

408. 152. 
Ley bourne, Juliana de, 408. 
Ley bourne, Sir Boger de : Seal, 411. 
Ley bourne. Sir Thomas de, 408. 
Leyke, Andrew de, 196*. 
Leyke, John de, 196. 
. Leyke, Robert de, 12S. 
Lincoln, the Bishop and Sec of, 55, 252. 
Lincoln Catliedral, 162, 385. 
Lincoln, William Bomare HI.. Earl of, 

196,4m 

Lincoln, Henry de Laci, Earl of, 25. 288. 
404,412. 

Lincoln, Banulph de Blondeville, Earl 
of, 403, 

Lincoln College, Oxford, SILL 

Lincoln's Inn Hall. LL 

Lindsay, Anns, 463: Motto, 283. 

Lindsay, Sir Alexander ; Crest, 265. 

Lindsay, Sir David ; Crest, 265. 

Lindsay, David, Earl of Crawford, 279. 

Lion, Heraldry of. 56 ; early and present 
French Blazon of, 52. 487: Drawing 
of, ill, 450 ; fine Example*, 450 ; 
burlesque Examples, 375. 450 : Treat- 
ment of in Foreign Heraldry, 4 *'■» ?. 



Lion of England, 58, unchanged, 469 : 
the Dexter Supporter of, 58, 302, 303, 
331 ; the Crest of, 266, 381. 

Lion of Scotland, 58. 'Jus : Supporters of, 
302, 414_i Cre*t of, 332, 414, 415; on 
Tiles, 481. 

Lion, Couchant or Dormant, 59_; Cow- 
ard, 59_i Double-Tailed, or Queue 
Fourchee, 60_L Issuant or Nalssant, 
60; Passant. 57_j Pn«sant Guardant, 
58 ; Passant Regardant, 58_i Rampant, 
58^ Rampant Reguardant, 58_i Sa- 
lient, 58j Sejant, 59_I Sejant Ram- 
pant, 59_i Statant, 59; Statant 
Guardant, 59_; Vigilant, GU_i Vorant, 
60: Winged. bU 

la on of Leon, 400. 

Lion Leopard. 51 ; Leoparde, 57, 487. 
Lion's Face. 50^ Jambe, Gambe, 59 ; 

Head, 59j Paw, 5iL 
Lions Combatant. 5Mj Counter-Passant, 

60 ; Counter-Rampant, 6JL 
Lion. Lyon, the Lonl ; the Kiug-of-Arms 

of Scotland, HI, 365, 
Lion or Lyon Office of Scotland, 365. 
Lioncel, 

Lionel Plantagenet, K.G., Duke of Cla- 
rence : Arms, 237: Coronet, 103. 
Lined, 85. 

Lisle, Lisle, De : Anna, 458 ; Effigy 

and Shield, 213. 
Lisle, Arthur, Viscount, 437. 
Lisle, the Baron, ILL 
Lists, 114. 

Litchfield, the Bishop and See. 352. 
Lithuania : Arms, 474. 
Little Bradley, 370. 
Little Casterton. Brass at. 336. 
Little Easton, Brass at, 105, 115, 339, 
321. 

Little Horkesley, Brass at, 182. 
Livery Colours, 114, 122. 132. 
Llandarf, the Bishop and See of, 49, 359. 
Llanover, the Baron, 4JL 
Llanthony Abbey, 186. 
Lodged, 62, 85. 

London, the Bishop and See of, 53, 9iL 

London, the City of : Arms, 53, 3fi5 ; 
Crest. 365 : Supporters, 366 ; Motto, 
366: Examples. 366. 

London, Church of All Hallows, Bark- 
ing, 369, 370. 

Ixmdon, Church of St. Andrew Under- 
shaft, 362. 

London, Church of St. Helen, 339. 

London, Church of St Martin Out- 
wieh, D0SL 

Ixindon, Society of Antiquaries of, 365. 

London. Royal Society of, 365. 

London, Fmtcmity of the Trinity House 
of. ui^L 



INDKX. 



Ixmdon. the Guildhall, 800, 
Long, Walter. Esquire : Crest, 272. 
Long Melford. Brass at, 2LL 
Longcspee, William. See William. 
Longespee, Ela, Countess of Salisbury : 

Seal 4j}&amp; 
Longespee, E. de, 223. 
Longcspee, Label of. 224. 
Longueville, the Duke of, 435. 
Longueville, the Count of, 228. 
Lord Lyon, Lord Lion, King-of-Arms 

of Scotland, Hl_, 305. 
Lorn : Arms, 402. 
Lorn, Lonls of, 40. 

Lorraine : Arms, 308; Quarterly with 
Bourchier, 220 ; Achievement of, 4G8. 
42L 

Lorraine, Alianore de, '220. 

Lorton, The Viscount, 5A 

Lothian, The Earl of, 193, 215, 223. 

Lothian, The Marquess of, 2L 

Load, Richard, 182, 

Louis VII. of France, 7.3. 

Louis VIII. of France. 23. 

Louis, the Dauphin ; Seal, 73, 404. 405. 

Louis of Bourbon : Seal, 413. 

Louisa, H.K.H.. the Princess, 252, 331. 

Louise de Savoye, Duchess D'Angou- 

lerae : Lozenge of Arms, 408. 
Louterell, Lonttrel, Loutcrel, Lot'rel : 

Arms, 400: Psalter, 287. 
Louterell, Sir Andrew, 187. 
Louterell. Sir Geoffrey, 187j Crest, 20fL 
Louvaine, Loveyne, Louvayne, 194. 300. 
Lovell, Lovcl, Louell, Sir John, 72. 

223. 

Lovell. Sir Thomas, 205. 
Lovell, Sir William, 224. 
Lozenge, 33, ML 

Lozenge of Arms, 137, U5± 394, 395: 

Superseded, 451. 
Lozengy. 35, 85. 
Lucies, 00, 125, 

Lucy, De : Arms. 125, 458 : Rebus. 125. 
Lucy, Reynold, 225. 
Lullingstonc, 121. 
Lunenburgh, 313. 
Lure, 4iL 

Lusignan, the Counts, lss 

Lusignan, Hugh de, ±05. 

Lusignan, Maud de, 405. 

Luton, the Confessor's Arms at, 120. 

Luttrell : Rebus, 123, See Louterell 

Luxemburg, Peter, Count of, 30rt. 

Lyhart, Walter, Bishop of Norwich: 

Rebus, 123. 
Lymphad, 40, 402. 
Lyndeshaye, Sir Felip de. 485. 
Lyndcshayo, Sir Simon, 212. 
Lysle, John. K.G., Lord : Crest, 220. 
Lyttclton, the Baron, 08. 



Macaulay, The Baren, 401. 
Macdonald, Tlie Baron. &lt;]IL 
Macdouald : B ulge, 203. 
Macdonald, of Loru, liL 
Macgregor : Badge, 203. 
Mac Williams : Arms, 309. 
Magdalen College, Oxford, ML 
Magdalen College, Cambridge, 36*3. 
Magdeburgh : Arms, 312. 
Magna Charta, $mled, 398. 
Maiden's Head and Rose, Badge, 305. 
Maintenance, Cap of, 114. 
Major Henniker : Motto, 283. 
Male Gryphon, 07. 

Malmains, Malemaynes : Arms, 409. 
485. 

Malmsbury, The Earl of, 03. 
Maltese Cross, 2S, 
Maltmvers : Arms, \ l.'i. ItiO. 
Manehe, Maunche, Hi. 
Manchester, the Bishop and See of, 359. 
Manchester, The Duke of, 02, 
Mandnvillo. De : Arms, 458. 
Mandevillc. Geoffrey de, Earl of Essex, 

11. 
Maned, 85. 

Manners, Ancient, 400. 
Manners, Thomas, K.G., First Earl of 
Rutland ; his Augmented Arms, 431. 
Manners, Duke of Rutland : Arms, 402. 
Manny, Sir Walter, 153. 
Mans, Enamelled Tablet at, 383. 
Mantelee, 35. 
Mantle, 114, 188, 

Mantling, Mantlings, or Lambrequins. 

109, 115, 12L: Foreign, 408. 
Mar : Arms, 415 

March, The Earl : Crest, 211, See Mor- 
timer. 

Marchioness, 117- 

Marchmont, Scottish Herald, 112. 

Mareschal, Le : Arms, 102. 458. 

Margaret of Anjou, Queen Consort of 
England. 105, 307. 

Margaret Beaufort. Countess of Rich- 
mond, 104, 380, 391. 

Margaret de Clare, Countess of Comwal I , 
140. 23L 

Margaret of Denmark, Queen Consort of 
Scotland, 145, 283, 322* 

Margaret Douglas. Countess of Lennox, 
103. 184. 380. 324. 

Margaret of France, Queen Consort of 
England, 142 ; her Seals, 152, 154. 
307, 407. 

Margaret, Lady Manny, 153. 

Margaret Plantagenet, Countess of Pem- 
broke. 1ILL 

Margaret Plantagenet, Countess of Salis- 
bury, 380. 

Margeria, of Hereford, 154. 

2 m 2 



532 



INDEX. 



Marks of Ctuiency, their Character and 
Use. U±a Early Examples, 199j 
Single, 200j Marshalling of, HI; 
Modern, 200. 

Marck : Anns. 313. 

Marlborough, John Churchill, Duko of; 
his Augmented Arms. 27, 435.443,462. 

Marlborough, the Duke of, quarters 
Despencor differenced, 132. 

Marmion, Do : Anns. MIL 

Marmion. Sir Robert de, 267, 330. 

Marmion. Sir William de, 198. 

Marny, William 225, 

Martjuess Marquis ; his Rank, Style, and 
Title, HO, 430; Coronet and Robes, 
117. 488 : Sons and Daughters, 117. 

Marshal, and Earl Marshal, of England, 
112, 235. 

Marshal. Mareschal. Lc : Arms, 4iL 

Marshalling. 8, 117, 135, 138: of Acces- 
sories, 170 : of two or more Shields, 
168 ; by Incorporation, 143. 145 : by 
Quartering. Ill ; Recent and Present, 
489 : Foreign, 353, 46L 

Mnrtel, Martell, 45, 17, 125. 

Martel, John de, 45, 125, 

Martlets. 65, 69_i in Orle. 187_i as Dif- 
ferencing Charges, 181. lhlL 

Marty n, Judge, 43, 

Mary Tudor: Arms, 222: Supporters, 
302 ; Badges.305 : Annsof Confeort,31 0. 

Mary Stuart : Anns, 298 ; Arms of the 
King, her Consort, 228. 

Mary of Burgundy, 355. 

Mary, the Princess, 251. 

Mary, HJLH. of Cambridge, 33L 

Mary de Chastillon, Countess of Pem- 
broke, 362. 

Mary d'Este, Queen Consort of England, 
311. 

Mary of Gueldrea, Queen of James II. of 
Scotland : Seal, 163, 213. 

Mary of Modena. See D'Este. 

Mary Stuart, Queen of Scotland : Sup- 
porters, 2iS(&gt;. 302 : Monument, 336. 

Mascle, 152. £7j for Differencing. 190. 

Masoned 85. 

Maasyngberde, Sir Thomas and Ladv, 

182. 23fi. 
Matilda, the Empress. 423. 
Matilda of Boulogne, Queen Consort of 

England, 306. 
Matilda of Flanders, Queen Consort of 

England, 306. 
Matilda of Scotland, Queen Consort of 

England, 306. 
Matilda dc Sarum, L1L 
Maulevt rer, Sir John, 262. 
Mau s sabre, of Torraine : Arms 409. 
Maximilian, of Austria, 355. 
Max worth Castle, 408? 



Mecklenburgh Strelitz : Arras, 312. 
Medals, 117, 352 ; Foreign, 353. 
Medjidie, Order and Insignia of the, 354. 
Mi'ggenheim, Von : Arras, 467. 
Meissen : Arms, 3_13_. 
Membcred, 85. 
Menell, Hugh de, 221, 
Menell, Robert de, 224, 
Mercers' Company, 368. 
Merchants Adventurers, 118, 307. 
Merchants Adventurers of Bristol, 308. 
Merchant Tailors' Company, 369. 
Merchants' Marks, 117. 367. 
Merchants of the Staple, 118, 862. 
Mere, De la : Arms, 459. 
Mere, De la, Abbot Thomas. See 
Thomas. 

Merevale Abbey, Brass at, 72. 121, 261. 

Merley, De : Rebus, 125. 

Merley, Roger de, 187. 

Merlons, £0, 

Merlotte, Martlet. 65. 

Mi rraaid, 68,261 ; ou Seals of Berkeleys, 
278: "of the Sea," Badge of the 
Black Prince, 335 ; Collar of, 68, 335- 

Mennan, 68. 

Merton College, Oxford, Brass at, 196 : 
Arms, 300. 

Metals of Heraldry, 19, 117j their Pre- 
cedence, 20. 

Meynel, De : Arms, 213. 

Middle Base, 16. 

Middle Chief, 16. 

Middlesex : Arms, 51. 

Mill Rind, 42. 

Mill-stone, Crest* 270. 

Milo, of Gloucester and Hereford, 154 : 
Arms, 1 55. 

Milton, John : Arras, 401. 

Minden, 312. 

Minor Charges, their Origin and Pri- 
mary Use, 177: introduced for Ca- 
dency or Differencing, 177. 

Misericorde, 43. 

Mitre, 47, 90, U8j of Archbishops and 

Bishops of Durham, 1JJL 
Modena, Mary of : Arms, 3LL 
Modern Heraldry, 439. See Heraldry. 

Modern. 

Modern Heraldry, Differences of, 206. 
Moclles, R. de, 1X4 

Mohun, Philippa de, Duchess of York, 

243. 453. 
Molesworth, Arms, 221L 
Moline, 47, 125 
Molines, De : Anns, 47, 125. 
Molineux, Sir William, 338. 
Molyneux : Arms, 47_, 1 2 5 , 
Monasteries, Arms. 360. 
Monchesney .William de, 51 ; Anns, 198. 
Mondet, Von, of Burgundy, 469. 



Digitized by Google 



INDEX. 



Mouetnue, De. 213. 

Monogram, 120, 122. 

Mon umeu ts, Royal, 383 ; of Royal Per- 
sonages, 384 ; tine Examples, 3K2. 

Monumental Heraldry. 380. 

Montacute, William de, " De Monte 
Acuto," Earl of Salisbury : Crest, spe- 
cially granted, 268j Seal, ILL 

Montarute : Differenced Arms, 175. 

Montague, Montagu : Arms, 64_, 1 &lt;&gt;&lt;!- 

Montague, Sir E&lt;lward, 221. 

Montague, John, 216. 

Montague, Sir Symon de. the first Sub- 
ject to Quarte r Arms, 160. 

Montague, Simon de, 160. 

Montague. William de, 160. 

Montagu, Mr. ; his able " Introduction 
to the Study of Heraldry," 1G2. 

Montbourchier : Arms, 11. 

Montbourchicr, Bertram de, 215. 

Montault, " De Monte Alto :" Arms, 45ft. 

Montault, Sir Andrew de, 215. 

Montault, Emma de, 190. 

Montault. Melie» nt do; Seal, 152, 18&amp;. 

Monteagle, The Huron : Motto, 284. 

Monteney, Mounteney, Sir E., 187. 

Monteney, Sir John, 187, 2112. 

Monttort," De : Arms, 60. 450: Effigy, 183. , 

Montfort, John de, Duke of Brittany, 166. 

Montfort, Simon do, Earl of Leicester, 
288, 

Montgomerio : Arms, 450. 
Monthermer: Arms 04, 166. 
Monthermer, Rauf de : Crest. 207. 
Montmorency : Arms, 64, 214. 
Montrose, the Duke of : Arms, 162; 

Supporters, 280, 
Moon, in Complement or Plenitude, 7_L 
Miirglin : Arms, 467. 
Morion, 45, 12. 

Mornington, The Earl of, 'ML 
Morse, 47. 
Mortier, 47. 

Mortimer, M De Mortuo Mari " : Arms, 
3L5L17A 

Mortimer : Panache Crest, 12L 267.271. 

Mortimer: Seal, 1112. 

Mortimer, Anne de, 243. 

Mortimer, Beatrice de, 409. 

Moi timer, Edmund de : Seal. 271 . '287. 

Mortimer. Hugh dc, 175. 

Mortimer, John de, 115. 

Mortimer, Rauf dc, l.V.t. 

Mortimer, Roger de, 175. 

Mortimer's Cross. Battle of, 75. 

Motto, Mottoes, 120, 181; Examples, 
2&amp;2; of England, 304j of Royal 
Personages, 305; of Garter, 341 : of 
Thistle, 345 ; of St. Patrick. 340_; of I 
Bath, 350j of St. Michael and St. 
George, 351 ; of the Star of India 352. 



Moule, Mr. ; his excellent Work, " He- 
raldry of Fish," 66, 269, 456. 

Moule, Miss Barbara ; her admirable 
Heraldic Drawings, 456. 

Moulton, of Gilgjand| 17.~&gt;. 

Moulton. of Frank ton, 17.~&gt;. 

Mound, 120.. 

Mounpynzon, Mompe.-son, 2&lt;&gt;1. 
Mount, ITj. 
Mounted, 85, 

Mowbray : Arms, 112, 153j Crest. 273 : 

Badge, 2!i2. 
Mowbray, Johu, K.G., Duke of Norfolk. 

153 J 2lifi. 

Mowbray, Thomas, K.G., Duke of Nor- 
folk, Earl of Nottingham, 127, 132, 
152. 258. 433: Crest, 223. 

Moyne : Crest, 26IL 

Much Hadham, Biass at, 366. 

Mulberry Tree : Badge, 2ti2. 

Mullet, 47, 486: for Differencing, 18JL 

Multon : Arms, 459. 

Mundulgas Nuthoobhoy : Arms, Crest, 
Motto. 37L iilL 

Municipal Corporations, 365. 

Muraillee. Walled, 8JL 

Murray : Badge, 263. 

Murray, Sir Andrew. 217. 

Muscamp : Arms, 60. 

Musical Lines, as a Charge, 112. 

Naiant, 85. 
Nail, 3J_L 

Nalssant, Issuant, 85, 
Naples : Arms, 307. 

Napoleon HI.. Emperor, 4, 354 : Arms, 

470; Eagle, 4J&amp; 
Natural Objects, in Blazon. 2Q. 
Navarre. Ancient. 306 : Modern. 4L 306. 

486. 

Navarre, Berenjraria of, Queen Comort 

of England, 3WL 
Navarre, Joanne of, Queen Consort of 

England, 3112. 
Navarre, Sancho, " the Strong," King of, 

486. 

Neath Abbey, Arms, 12. 

Nebulee, 18, 8JL 

Nelond, Prior Thomas, 1QQ. 

Nelson, Horatio, Viscount: Blazon of 
his Arms and Crests from the " Peer- 
age," 441 ; Supporters, 442 

Nelson, The Earl, 00, 

Nerved, 8JL 

Nevill, De Nevyll : Early Arms. 2£bL 

Neville Ancient, 46L i£L 

Neville: Arms, 25, 166_; Crest, 273: 

Supporters, 2S1L 
Neville, Early Seals, 220, 404, 15&amp; 
Neville, Badges, 261, 262, 330 ; Motto. 

283. 



5;u 



INDEX. 



Neville, of Raby, Differenced Shields of^ 1 
203 . 

Neville, Anne, Quoen Consort of Eng- 
land, IMi, 303. 

Neville, Cecilia, Duchess of York, 245. 

Neville, Isabelle, Duchess of Clarence, 
216. 

Neville, of Salisbury, Labels of, 202. 
Neville, Lord Bcrgavenny, 203. 
Neville, Gilbert &lt;le, 461. 
Neville, John, K.G., Iiord Montagu and 

Duke of Northumberland, 169, 190. 

202. 

Neville, John de, 107. 

Neville, Lord Latymcr, 203. 

Neville, Ralph de. Earl of Westmorland, 

134,264^839; Crest, ML; Collar of 

SS., 330. 
Neville, Sir Roger, 215. 
Neville, Robert de, Bishop of Durliam, 

1JJL 

Neville, Robert de, 220. 
Newburgh : Arms, 10t'&gt;. 170. 
Newcastle, The Duke of, 162 ; Crest. 212, 
New College, Oxford, 49, ML 
Niches in Architecture, 37&lt;&gt;. 
Nicholas, Emperor of Russia, K.(J., 
473. 

Nicholas, Sir llarris ; References to his 
able Heraldic Works, 416, 482, 133. 

Nichols, Mr. J. Gough ; his Suggestions 
as to the SS. Device, 337; his able 
Paper on the Earldom of Salisbury, 
403 

Ninth Son ; his Modern Difference, 206. 
Noble (coin), 112. 

M Noble and Gentle Men of England," 

by Mr. Shirley ; a useful Work, and 

well illustrated, 156. 
Norfolk : Badge, 202. 
Norfolk, John Mowbray, K.G.,Duko of: 

Seal, 153_: Crest, 266. 
Norfolk, Thomas Mowbray. K.G., Earl 

Marshal, and Duke of Norfolk ; his 

Augmented Arms, 12L 132, 258. 433 ; 

Crest, 273_; Seal, 15± 
Norfolk, Thomas, " de Brothcrton," Earl 

of, 235, 

Norfolk, Howard, Duke of. Earl Mar- 
shal : Crest, 59_; quarters Warrenne, 
79: Arms, U2, 168, 428, 432. 

" Norfolk Arcbawlogv," Reference to, 
151. 

Normnn Shields, LL 

Norroy King of Arms, 111. 120; Arms, 

365. 

Northesk.William Carnegie, Earl of, 136. 
North Miming, Brass at, IS. 
Northwick, The Baron. 66. 
Northumberland, The Duke of, 50, 66. 
Norton Bri/r. 48, 185. 



Norway : Arms, 310, 478: Flags, UiL 

See Sweden. 
Norwich, the Bishop and See of, 218. 

352. 

Norwich Cathedral, 123. 

Norwich City : Arm*, ::«;*'. 

Norwich, Church of St. John, Madder- 
market, at, 307. 

" Notes and Queries," Reference to, 45. 
119,298, 315. 

" Nouveau Traite' de Blazon," an excel- 
lent French Treatise on Heraldry, by 
M. Bouton, 470. 

Nova Scotia Baronets, 95 : Badge, 95, 
12L 

Nowed, 85. 

Nuremberg : Arms, 312. 

Oak Branches, 7_L 
Oakes : Arms, 14. 

Oak leaves. Badge of Fite-Alans, 33iL 
Odingsels, Odiugsells, Ida d\ 407, 4m 
Odingsels, William d\ 184, iiiiL 
Official Arms, 11L 
Official Heraldry, 357. 
Official Insignia marshalled, UL 
Of the Field, Of the Firbt, Ac^ UL 
Ogress, 1&amp; 

Oittrich, Thomas, 1 S5. 
Okstead : Arms, II. 
Oldenburgh : Anns, 31L 
Oldham, Bishop: Arms. ' 361 : Rebus, 
123. 

Oliphant, Lord: Supporters. '160. 
Oliver Cromwell : Seal 102. 
On Degrees, 28. 
Oppressed, S."&gt;. 
Or, 1&amp;2L 

Order of the Bath, 312. 

Order of the Dannebrog, 355. 

Order of the Garter, 310. 

Order of the Golden Fleece, 355. 

Order of the Medjideo, 354. 

Order of St Michael and St. George. 

Order of St. Patrick, 845, 4!±L 
Order of the Star of India, 351. 
Order of the Thistle, 845. 
Order of the Victoria Cross, 353. 
Order of the White Elephant, 'dh*L 
Orders of Knighthood. 114, 121, 333. 
Orders of Knighthood, Foreign, 353. 
Ordinaries and their Diminutives, 2_L 48. 
Ordinary of Arms, 121; Mr. Pap- 
worth's. 189. 
Oreiller, 48. 

Oriel College, Oxford, 'ML 
Orkney, the Earl of, 63. 
Orle, TJrle, 3J, 81, 133, 
Orleans, Due d' : Arms, 470. 
Ormonde, the Marquess of, 67^ 



INDEX. 



Ostrich Feather, 72, 153, 232. 

Ostrich Feather Badge, 256; Legend of 
its Origin, '257 : used by the Plan- 
tngcnct Princes, 257 ; borne by tho 
Sons of Henry IV., 259: by the 
Beauforts, 258 : differenced. 257. 259 ; 
the three feathers grouped together, 
2i,o ; tho Badge of the Prince of 
Wale*, 259, 260. 823: charged on his 
"Shield of Peace," by the Black 
Prince, 231. 

Otter, Ixmtre, 125. 

Otway, Sir G. G., C8. 

Outrani, Sir James, 100. 

Outtred, Sir Robert, 185, 

Over all, 44 Sur le tout," 85, 

Overt, 85. 

Oxford, the Bishop and the See of, 55. 

Oxford Cathedral, 49, 227. 

Oxford, Bishop, the Chancellor of the 

Garter, 1142. 
Oxford UniTersity : Arms, 3G0. 
Oxford City : Arms, 366. 
Oxford, Earls of : Anns, 38. 
Oxford : Bosses of the Vaulting of the 

Divinity School, 120, 

Pache, De, Arms, 213, 
Padlock, 18. 

Pagenham, Sir Kdmond do, 202. 
Paignel, John do : Banner. 176. 
Painters' Company and Hall, 370. 
Pale, 2*2, 4g, 
Pale-wise, 85. 
Pall, 18. 

Pallet, 15, 23, 18. 

Palmer s Staff. Pilgrim's Staff, 18. 

Paly, 36, S3. 

Paly Bendy, 85. 

Panache, 121 : Panache Crest, 2£L 
Pan mure. The Karl of, 217. 
Panther, Heraldic, 6iL 
Papworth, Mr. ; his excellent and 

valuable Ordinary of Arms, 489. 
Paris, Church of St. Etieune du Mont 

at, ifil 

Paris, Imperial Library at, 468. 
Parker, Sir G., 22. 

Parr, Catherine, Queen Consort of 

England, SBL 
Party, Parted, 85. 
Parys, Robert, 123. 
Paschal Lamb, 12L 
Pascuant, 85. 
Passant, 85. 
Passant Guardant, 85. 
Passant Rcpassunt, 85. 
Passion. Emblems of the. 395. 
Pastoral Staff. IS. 
Patonce. 49, Sfi. 



Patriarchal Cross. 28, 12, 
Patteo Formee, 29,111 
Pattee Fitchee. 12. 
Pauldron, 12. 

Pavnel, Sir Thomas de, 187. 
Payne), Sir William de, 18L 
Peaches, 7JL 
Peacock, Pawue, 21, 
IVan, 20, 12L 
Pears, 76. 

Pebmarsh, Brass at, 191. 

Peche, Pechio, Sir John de, 76, 124, 

202. 

Peche, Sir Robert, 221. 
Peer, 12L 

Peenige, 121; Examples of Modem 

Debased Heraldry from tho, 41). 
Peeress in her own Right, 169. 
Peers' Robes, 488. 
Pegasus, 6S. 

Pel 1mm : Arms, 11 ; Augmented Arms, 

434, 436, 462_; Badge, 262_; early 

Crest, 221. 
Pel ham-Clinton, Duko of Newcastle : 

Arms, 462 ; Crests, 274. 
Pelican in Piety, 6JL 
Pellet. 25, 49; Pellettec, SG. 
Pembridge, Sir Richard, K.G., 267. 

343. 

Pembroke, Aymer Do Valence, Earl of. 

See Valence. 
Pembroke, William de Valence, Earl of, 

See Valence. 
Pembroke, John de Hastings, Earl of. 

See Hastings. 
Pembroke, Lawrence de Hastings, Earl 

of, 382. 

Pembroke, Jaspar Tudor, Earl of. Set 
Tudor. 

Pembroke, Herbert, Earl of, GO. 

Pendent, 86, 22L 

Penner and Inkhorn, 12. 

Pennon, 12J_, 281 ; Pennoncollo, 122. 

Per, S6_i Per Ik nd, lfi. 

Per Chevron, lfi. 

Per Cross, UL 

l\ i K. UL 

Per Pale, 16, 36. 

Per Saltire, BL 

Percy: Arms, 38, 459; Badge, 262; 

Crest. 273: Lion, 55; Motto, '283 
Percy Monument in Beverley Minster, 

14, 38. 383. 
Percy, Sir Henry : Seal, 3HL 
Perient, Ladv, 22L 
Pcrrott, Sir E. G , lfi. 
Pescod, Walter, 7A 122. 
Peterborough, the Bishop and See of, 359. 
Petre : Arms, 302. 

Peverell, Catherine, 41_l_i Badge. 263, 
ILL 



536 



INDEX. 



Peyton, John do, 204. 
Peyvrc, Peyver, John do, 190. 
Peyvre, Roger de, 1 90 . 
Peyvrc, William de, 19JL 
Pheon, 42. 

Philip " the Good," of Burgundy, 355. 

Philip IV., of France, 158, 

Philip, of Spain. 3_LiL 

Philip, Sir William. K.G., 202, 267, 
886: his fine Effigy, 344. 

Philippa, of Haiuaul t. Queen Consort of • 
England : Arms. 3J&gt;L409, 490_; Seal, 
1.59, 160; uses Ostrich Feather Badge, 
257 ; her Monument, 159, 161, 382, ML 

Pickaxe, Pic, 49. 

Pickering, Thomas dc, 215. 

Pickworth do : Arms, 4JL 

Pictorial Heraldry, 441. 

Pierced, 8IL 

Pile, 24_i Pily, 8fL 

Pillow, 43, 50. 

PUy Bendy, 86. 

Pitcher, 50. 

Pitt : Anns, 403. 

Pius IX., 212. 

Planche\ Mr., Rougo Croix Pursuivant, - 
72, 149, 154, 186, 196, 245, 261. 276, 
837 . 

Plantagenet, the Surname, 230. 

Plantagenet, (Geoffrey, of Anjou, 122. 

Plantagenet, the last, 246. 

Plantagenet Princes : Badges, 72, 75. 76. 
256-259, 303-305 : Arms, 234-247, 
295-297; Supporters, 302; Crowns. 
316-319: Coins, 417. 

Planta Genista, 7jL 122, 303. 

Plasterers' Comjxiny, 370. 

Plate, 25, 50; Platte«. 811 

Plate, Marks of, 5JL 252. 

Playing Tables, 50. 

Pleissen ; Anns, 313. * I 

Pleshy College, Seal, 261. 
Plessis, Johu de, 190. 
Plompton : Anns, 102. 
Plumes of Feathers, 121. 
Pods of Beans, &amp;c, 75. 
Poictou : Anus, HQ- 
Pointed Cross, 28. 

Points of a Label, 50. 4j5. See Isabel. 

Poland : Anns, 474. 

Pole, Do la: Arms. 460; Quartered by 

Neville, 202 : Crest, 260. 
Pole, John de la : E.G.. Duke of Suffolk. 

103. 108, 167. 344 ; Monument, 386. 1 
Pole : Amis, HKL 
Pole, Sir Richard, 65, 2LL 
Pomegranate, 308 ; and Rom?. 305. 
Pomelled. 80. 
Pomerania : Arms, 312. 
Pom me, 25. 50. 
Pomraee, 50. 



Ponsonby, 42. 

Ponthieu : Arms, 306. 

Pope, Sir Thomas, Founder of Trinity 

College, Oxford, 362. 
Popinjay, 65. 
Portcullis, 50. 

Portcullis ; Badge, 26L 205 ; Pendeut to 

Collar of SS., 33L 
Portcullis ; Pursuivant, 111. 
Portugal; Arms, 131 1, 477 : Supporters, 

Standard, and Ensign, 477. 
Portugal, Beatrice of, Countess of Aran - 

del and Surrey : Seal, ilL 4RO 
Postage-stamps, Foreign, 468, 487. 
Potenhnll, John de, 103. " 
Potent, 20, 122. 
Poulett, The Earl, 53. 
Powdered, Poudree, 12, 86, 122. 
Pownder, Thomas, 118, 149. 
Powys, Powis: Arms. 163; Quarterly 

with Holland, UL 
Poynings : Arms, 4 GO. 
Poynings, Sir Nicholas de, 212. 
Precedence, the Order of. 428-431 ; of 

Women, 43L 
Preservation of early Ht-raldie Relies and 

Authorities, as opposed to " Restora- 
tion " of them, 3iLL 
Prester John, 358. 
Prestwyeh. Dean, H5. 
Preyiug. 80. 

Priuee Consort, HJLLH. Albert, the late : 
the Marshalling of his Arms, 167 : 
Anns, Crest, Supjx&gt;rters, Coronet, and 
Motto, 314. 321. 

Presliaw House, Hampshire, 212. 

Princes : Coronets. See Royal Cadency. 

Princes of Wales. See Wales. 

Prince of Wales, H R H the. See Albert 
Edward. 

Princess of Wales. See Wales. 

Priuceases : Anns, 207 ; Cadeucy, 253 : 
Coronet*, 322. 

Princesses Royal, 252, 33_L 

Principality of Wales : Anns, 250, 324 ; 
Marshalled iti the First Quarter of 
the Shield, bearing the " Arms of the 
Second Order" of H.R.H. the Prince 
of Wales, 324, 325. 

I'rojKT, 20, 

Provence, Alianore of, The Queen. 
300. 

1 'i ussia : Arms. 331. 472 ; Supporters. 

Crown. Royal Standard, and National 

Flag. 472. 113. 
Pryck S[»ur, 5j£. 
Pseudo-Heralds, 443. 
Public Institutions : Arms, 365. 
Public SehcKils : Arms. SSL 
Pulham Chureh, Norfolk, 7A 16. 
Purflcd, 8iL 



Google 



INDEX. 



537 



Purpure, 19, 122; early Examples of 
this Tincture. 485; sometimes as- 
signed to the Lion of Loon, 490. 

Purse, 50. 

Pursuivants, 111, 112. 
Pursuivants of Scotland, 112. 
" Pursuivant of Arms," a valuable aud 
useful Work, by Mr. Planche', 2SL 

Quadrate, 50. 

Quarter, 31_. 5.0. See Gin ton. 

Quarter Pierced, 22^ 50. 

Quartered ShieldsTHl, 103; without 
Quartering Lines, 159, 253. 45i 

Quartering. 122 ; Examples of, Uil ; De- 
velopment of, 15G ; Examples of de- 
velopment, 156. 

Quartering Bordure, and Treasure, 144. 

Quartering in Foreign Heraldry, 46iL 

Quarterings, 123, 157. 

Quarterly, 10, 86; Quarterly of Eight, 
&amp;c, UL. 

Quarterly Quartered, lfi. 

Quarterly Quartering. 142, 157. 

Quarterly Pierced, 20., 51L 

Quatrefoil, 51L 

Queen, 1L&amp;L The, 108, 150; Cadency of 
her Family, 252 : her Crown, 320; 
Royal Achievement of her Aims, 331 . 

Queen's College, Oxford, 3fil ; Seal and 
Anns of, MM. 

Queen's College, Cambridge, 363. 

Queue-Fourchee, 80. 

Quilled, 8JL 

Quineey, Rol* rt tie. 219 ; Roger de, his 

Seal. 19L IMj Saer de, 21 9. 
Quintefoil. 12. 

Racheconrte, Sir Theobald. 1H0. 
RadclitTe: Arms. 364. 469. 
Radiant, Rayonnee. 8JL 
Ragulee. Raguly, 18, fifi. 
Rainbow, 50. 

Ram, Heraldic, 123, 125, 45JL 452. 

Rampant. 8iL 

Rampant Sejant, 80. 

Rampton, Ettigy at, '^14. 

Ramryge, Thomas, Abbot of St. Albeu's: 
Rebus, 123 ; his Monumental Chantry 
in the Abbey Church of St. Alban, 
279, 452 ; its excellent Heraldic Art, 
153 ; Feather Badge in it. 260: 
Shields of Arms in it, 454. 455. 

Ramsey : Rebus, 125. 

Rapier, 5iL 

Ratzburgh : Arms, 312. 
Raven, !-■"&gt;, 

Ravensbergh : Anns. 31 1. 
Raymond, of Provence, 15. 
Rays of the Sun. 5J1 
Razee. J&lt;1L 



Rebated, 86. 

Rebus, 123. 

Recercelee, 50,22. 

Red Dragon, Badge, 305, 306. 

Reflected, Heflexed. 86, 303. 

"Regal Heraldry," a valuable Work, by 

Mr. Willement, 312, 325. 
Regalia, 125, 313. 
Regeiistein : Arms. 3 1 3. 
Reguardant. 86. 
lte indoor, 63. 
Removed, 8iL 
Renfrew, The Baron, 322, 
Repeated Charges, 1L ITS. 
Reptiles, Heraldic, 63. 
Resoun. Sir John de, 201 . 
Rest, 5IL 

Restoratioti of early heraldic Relics and 
Authorities, as opposed to the Preser- 
vation of them, 391. 

Retorted, 86, 

Rhine, the Counts Palatine of the, 477. 
Rial, 412, 
Riband. 23, 5L 

Ribbon of the Bath, 343 ; of the Garter, 
342 : of St. Michael and St. George, 
351 : of St. Patrick. 346j of the Star 
of India, 352 ; of the Thistle, 345. 

Ribbons of Honour, 352. 

Richard L : Anns, 58, 205 ; as Count of 
Aquitaine, 294 ; Badges, 304 ; Crest, 
266 ; Crown, 315; Second (Jreat Seal, 
266. 295. 401 ; Anus of Consort, 306: 
Monumental Elligies, 3s3. 

Richanl ILl Arms, '2^5. 2'.h; ; his Shield 
im]mling the Arms of the Confessor, 
166. 296, 409; Badges, 304, 356, 432; 
Badges and Shields in Westminster 
Hall, 263, 378,454, 490j Banner, 288; 
imputed Supporters, 302 ; Great Seal. 
296, 401 ; Arms of Consorts, 166, 307; 
Monument and Ehigy in Westminster 
Abbey, 38, 74, 122, 384. 

Hit-hard* II., his Grants of Augmenta- 
tions, 126, 134. 

Richard IL. More hisAceession, 222, 21L 

Richard III. : Anus, 207: Impaled with 
the Arms of his Consort. 1 66 ; Badge*. 
305 ; Supjmrters, 302 ; Anns of Con- 
sort, 166, 308. 

Richard HI., before his Accession, as 
Duke of Gloucester, 246. 

Richard. Earl of Cornwall and Emjieror, 
33, 64, 2H, 234_i Supporter, 277. 

Richanl PlanUigenet/'ofCouinjjsburgh," 
Earl of Cambridge : Anns, 243. 393 ; 
Arms of Consort. 243. 

Richanl Plantar-net, K.&lt;;.. Earl of 
Cambridge and Rutland, and Third 
Duke of York : Anns, 215 ; Anus of 
Consort. 245. 



Digitized by Google 



538 



INDEX. 



Richard Plantagenet, K.G.. Fiab Duke 
of York. Duke of Norfolk and War- 
renne, awl Earl of Nottingham : Arms, 
2ifL 

Richmond, Edmund Tudor, "of Had- 

ham," Earl of, 24iL 
Richmond, Henry Tudor, Earl of. See 

Henry VII. 
Richmond, John de Dreux, Count of 

Brittany, and Earl of, 34, 153, 208. 

214. 

Richmond, John Plantagenet, K.G., 

Earl of, 24_L 
Richmond, the Duke of, 273, 281, 13JL 
Richmond, De, 213. 
Richmond Herald, 111. 
Ripon, the Bishop and See of, 359. 
Rishangles, Draft* at, 1 K5. 
Kitting, Roussant, 8iL 
Rivere, Nicholas de, 215. 
Rivers, John de, 197. 
Rivera, Richard Widville, E.G., Earl, 

llb\2i±. 

Robsart, Louis or Ludovick. K.G., I^rd 
Bourehier, 54j Crist, 270; Monu- 
ment. 3S3, :vm. 

Robertson : Badge, 263. 

Rocclane, Rocelyn : Anns, J_L 

Rocbefoucault, Count de, 1 88. 

Rochester, the Bishop aud See of, 359. 

Rochfort, Rochefort, De : Anns, 163, 
3(&gt;9. 

Rochfort, John de, 215, 2JJL 
Rochfort, Rauf de, 215, 2BL 
Roet, Roett : Arms, 393_; Crest, 271. 
Rokeby : Arms, 460. 
Rokele, Richard de, 197. 
Rokewoode, 42. 

Rolls of Arms, 12JL 48_L 482; the he- 
raldic Terms employed in them, 483. 

Roll of Caerlaverock or Carlaverock. 93, 
481 ; Banners of Saints descril)ed in 
it, 121; Banner of Henry, Earl of 
Lincoln, described in it, 288, 485 : 
Roll of the Bannerets present with 
the King, i$H; Mr. Wright's new 
Translation and Edition, 287. 487. 

Romare III., William de, Earl of Lin- 
coln : Seal, 196^ 10JL 

Rompu, fifi. 

Rose, of Heraldry, Toj Roval Badge, 
260, 303: for Differencing. 193j in 
Modern Cadency, 206. : of England. 75, 
332; of Lancaster, 75, 304 : of York. 
7J&gt;, 304, 305_1 en Soleil, 75, 339_; and 
Arrows, 305; and Thistle, 305. 

Rose Noble (coin), 117. 

Rozon, Du, of Bretagne : Anns, 469. 

Ros, De, the Baron, 54, 

Roe. William de, 12&amp; 

Ross, or Roos : Arms. 176. &gt; I •*&gt;. 



I Ross, of Kendall, 31&amp; 

j Ross, Scottish Herald, ILL 

Rostock : Anns, 3_12, 

Rothsav, the Duke of, 322, 323, 

Rothsay, Scottish Herald, ILL 

Rouelle Spur, 52, 486. 

Rouen, Eiligy of Richard L at, 383. 

Rouge Croix, Pursuivant, 111. 126. 

Rouge Dragon, Pursuivant, 111. 126. 

Roundle. Rondelet, 2l± 24, 5Jj for Dif- 
ferencing, 195. 

Rous Roll, in the College of Arms, 4i*u. 

Routhe, Piers de : Arms, 483. 

Royal Artillery : Blotto, 371. 

Royal Banners, 300. 

Royal Cadency, 206, 230=255. 

Royal Cadency of France, 470. 

Royal Consorts : Arms, 306-315. 

Royal Family, Cadency of the present, 
25L 

Royal Marines : Motto, 371. 

Royal Monuments of England, 383-386, 
388, 390-394. 

Royal Personages; their Arms Mar- 
shalled, 168; their Arms Blazoned, 
293-300. 

Royal Personages; their Monuments, 

Royal' Seals, 398, 400, 1QL 

Royal Si gnat ure. the earliest known, 

398. 

Roval Society of I»ndon : Arms, 365. 

Royal Supporters. 275. 301-303 ; of Scot- 
land, 280, ILL 

Rudder of a Ship, as a Charge, 261. 

Rue, Cbaplet of, 3M» See Craneelin. 

Russell. Duke of Bedford : Arms, 462 ; 
Crest. 63, 66; Motto, 28JL 

Russia : Arms, 473 ; National Flags, 
473; Naval Flags, 474; the Czar, as 
Successor to the Cajsars, 473. 
, Russia Merchants, 368. 

Rustocben, Die, of Pomemnia : Anns, 

iSL 
Rustre, 33. 5L 
Ruthven, William, 279. 
Rutland. Edward P lan ta genet, Earl of. 

See Edward. 
Rutland, Richard Plantagenet, Earl of. 

See Richurd. 
Rutland, the Duke of: Amis, 64^ 68. 

462; Crest, 212. 
Rutland, Thomas Manners, K.G., First 

Earl of, 43L 
Ryther, Sir William do, LJ3. 
Ryther, William de, 7L_ 1112. 

Sable, 19, 126, 

Sacred Emblems and Symbols, 305. 
Sagittarius, Sngittary, Centaur. iYL 
294. 



Digitized by Google 



INDEX. 



589 



Sails of Anna, Heraldic Sails, 288, 41 -J. 
St Alhan, 12!L 

St. Alban, Abbey Churcb of. 38, 68, 
12a. 339: Anus. 360, ihl ; Chantries 
of Abbots Wheathampstodo and Ram- 
rygo at, 379, 383, 396, 452-454 : 
Heraldry of, 377 ; Monuments at, 
385. 413. 414; Heraldic Glass at, 
218. 237. 23JL 

St. Alban's, " the Boke" of, lfifi, 

St. Alban's, the Duke of, 43&amp; 

St Andrew : Cross, 27* Li^ 

St. Anthony : Cross, 27, 53; Order of, 
335. 

St Arnaud : Arms, 400. 

St. Arnaud. Aumery de, 195. 212. 

St Arnaud, Lord, 382. 

St Asaph, the Bishop and See of, 359. 

St. Cross, near Winchester, Brass at, 

St. Cuthbert, of Durham. Banner, 287. 
St David's, the Bishop and See of, 359. 
St. Edmund : Arras, 99, 126, iM* 
St. Edward : Anus, 99, 126; Shield at 

Westminster, 186. See Confessor. 
St. George : Anus, 99; Early Figures 

of, 389. 

St George, Clwpel of, at Windsor, 129, 
340. 312; its Heraldry, 377. 

St. John, of Beverley : Banner, 287. 

St John, Knights o'f, 28, 'i^L 

St John's College. Oxford : Arms, 362 ; 
impaled Shield of Charles Land Hen- 
rietta Maria at, Ml. 

St John'H College, Cambridge, 54, 123: 
Arms, 363 ; Heraldry of Gateway, 
378. 

St. John : Early Seals, 405, 463j Badge, 

St. John, Agnes de, 226. 

St. John, John de, 1st. 

St John, John de, the Younger, 223. 

St John, Roger de, 184. 

St John of Sussex. 405, 4Ji3. 

St. Lcger ; Arms, -Hi:'. 

St. Leger, Thomas de, 2112. 

St. Michael. LiM. 

St. Michael and St. George ; Onler, In- 
signia, and Officers of, 350. 3&amp;L 

St. Omer : Arms, 19_L iiiiL 

St Patrick : Cross, 27, LOL 

St. Patriek : Onler. Insignia, and OAleers 
of. 345, 341L 

St Patrick "s Cathedral, Dublin, Restora- 
tion &lt;£ 490. 49L 

St. Paul. 5a, 308. 

St. Paul's. Arms of Dan and Chapter 
of, 3SSL 

St. Peter, of York, Banner. 287. 
St Peter's Collrgp. Cambridge. 362. 
St. Quintin : Arms, 15L 2J L 



St. Quintin, Robert de : Seal, 15X 
St. Quintin, Sir Thomas de, 1*2, 27JX 
St. Stephen's Crown of Hungary, 472. 
Saintly Emblems, 2j£L 
i Salamander, 68, 6JL 
Salient, 8iL 

Salisbury, the Bishop and See of, 55, 359. 

Salisbury Cathedral. 336* 338. 

Salisbury, Ela. Countess of, 403. 

Salisbury - , Margaret Plantagenet, Coun- 
tess of. 3815. 

Salisbury _iVijlliam Longespee, Earl of, 
IXL See William. 

Salisbury, William Montacute, Earl oLt 
Seal, ILL 

Salisbury, the Nevilles, Earls of. See 

Neville. 
Salmon, 122, 

Salters' Company and Hall, 369. 
Saltiro, 24, 27, 51, 455. 
Sal tire- wise, 86. 
Saltmarsh, De. 182. 
! Sancho, " the Strong," King of Navarre, 
486. 
Sanglier, 62. 
Sans, Sans Nombro, &amp;7_ 
Sareelee. £L 

Sardinian War Medal, 351. 

Savoy, Arms of Counts of. 177. 

Savoy, Arms of House of. 177. 

Sawbridgeworth, Brass at. 212. 387. 

Sawley Abbey, 49, 339. 

Sawtry, Brass at, 2';'.». 

Saxe-Coburg-Gotha : Arms and Sup- 
porters, 477. 

Saxony : Arms. 168, 314, 477. 

Saxony, Ancient, 314. 

Saxonv. H.R.H.. Albert Edward, Prinoo 
of Wales, Duke of. 322. 

Saxony, H.R.H.. the late Prince Consort, 
Duke of. See Albert 

Saxony : Arms, Ctist of Early Shields o£ 
at the Crystal Palace, 477. 

Say De : Anus, 458. 

Say, Sir John de, 132. 

Sealing ladder. ftL 

Searpe, 51. 

Sehrotenegger, Die : Arms. 467. 
Schwerin County : Arms, 'ALL 
Schwerin Principality : Anns. 312. 
Scintillant. 8_L 

Scotland : Arms. 32, 298 ; the Lion of, 
58; the Treasure of. 54, 144. 19L 298; 
Badges, 76, 332; Crest, 332, i_15j Sup - 
porters, 302, 414. 

Scotland : Arms, dimidiated, 163 ; impal- 
ing Denmark on n lx&gt;zent:e. 327 ; ini- 
tialing Franco Modem and England, 
393; impaling (ini Mn - and Flanders. 
147 ; impaling Iieanfort on a lozenge. 
115. 



zed by Google 



540 



INDEX. 



Scott, Sir Walter, of Abbotaford, 68, 46.L 
Scott, John, Earl of Eldon, 46JL 
Scott, of Thirlstane : Crest and Motto, 
283,435. 

Scott, Thomas, Archbishop of York, SfiL 
Scottish Augmentations. 435. 
•'Scottish Heraldry," Mr. Seton's; its 

Excellence nnd Value, 415; References 

to, 217. 263. 275. 
ScottarHcralds, 112. 
Scottish Seals, 279, ILL 
Scroll and Motto, 171. 
8crope: Arms, 210 ; Seven Differenced 

Shields of, 226, 
Scrope, Sir Henry le, 225, 4S&amp; 
8crope, Henry, 221 ; John, 227. 
Scrope, John, Lord, 267j Crest, 121, 4HL 
Scrope, Richard le, 224j Stephen, 227. 
Scrope, Richard, I/ml, of Bolton, 21G. 
Scrope, Thomas. 227 ; William le, 225, 

486. 

Scrope and Grosvenor Controversy, 211L 

Scudamore, 5_2» 

Scafleld, The Earl of, lillL 

Seagrave, John : Seal, 278. 

Seal. Brass at, 269. 

Seal-Heraldry, 4QSL 

Seals, Heraldry of, 397 : introduced into 
England, 3iiZ ; Forms, 398 ; General 
Description, 398; Classification, 399 : 
Study of. 399 : Great Seals, 294-296, 
899, 400; Impressions protected by 
" Fenders," 399: various Classes, 399, 
400; Delight of Early Heralds in 
them, 400; Heraldic Qualities and 
Characteristics, 400; eliarged with 
several Shields, 150. 406 ; charged 
with Mounted Effigies, 411 ; with 
Banners, 410; with Shipping 412. 
413; Supporters first used in them, 
403 ; early Examples, 277, 404^ 405; 
Scottish, 279, 414 ; Laing's Catalogue 
of Ancient Scottish, 330, 456, 49E 

Sea-Lion, 6&amp; 

Seax, 51. 

Second Son ; his Modern Difference, 20G. 

Second Title, 98, 128. 

Secretum, Secreta. 399. 

Seeds of Plants, &amp;c, Ifi; Seeded. 8JL 

Sefton, Brass at, 3_3JL 

Segrave : Arms. 153, 458. 

Sogiavc. Sir Estevenc de. 20^ 2LL 

Segrave, Sir Henry do, 21 1. 

Segrave, John de, 22&amp; 

Segrave, Sir Symon de, 21L 

Segreant, 87. 

Sejant. SL 

Sejant Addorsed, 8L 
Selbv. Monument at. 45. 171. 
Selkirk, the Earl of, fiS, 
Semee, 11, 87, 118. 



I Sergeaux, of Cornwall : Arms, 401. 
! Seruse, Cerise, 5L 
I Setou : Arms, IfiiL 

Seton, the Bnron, 9JL 
I Seton, Mr. ; his admirable Work on 

Scottish Heraldry. 203, 215, 330, 415. 

450 ; on Heraldic Debasement, 442. 
| Sevans, Sir Rol&gt;ert de, 43, 13L 282. 
Seventh Son : his Modern Difference, 

206. 

Sever, Warden Henry, 19JL 

Seymour, Jane, Queen Consort of 

England, 30iL 
Shackle-Bolt, 5_L 
Shafted, 8L 
Shake-Fork, 5L 

Shakespean&gt;: Rebus, 123; Arms and 
Crest, 52, 4111 ; refers to Badges, 255 ; 
uses the term 41 Colours," 97. 

Shamrock, 75^ 128; of Ireland, 232. 

Shastone, R. de, 184. 

Sheaf of Arrows, 40, 261. 

Sheffield, Arms, IL 

Shells, Heraldic, 6JL 

Shield of Arms, 4. 

Shields, Heraldic ; their Varieties, Form, 
their Parts, Points, and Primary 
Divisions, 12-17, 454; as Charges, 51. 

Shields of Pretence, Inescutcheons, 31; 
140; Examples, 16J» 

Shields, Heraldic, in Architecture, 51. 
M77. 

Shields, Heraldic, as Decorative Aooea- 

tories, 52, 465. 
Shields, Heraldic, in Foreign Effigies, 

465. 

Shields, Heraldic, on Monuments, 51. 

386. 

Shilliugford, Brasses at, 195. 
Ship, 52, 

Shipping on Seals, 412. 

Shirley, Mr.; hi* excellent Work. 44 Noble 

and Gentle Mi-n ol England," 456. 
Shovel, Sir Cloudesley : Augmented 

Anns, 435. 
: Shrewsbury. John Tnlhot. E.G.. Earl of, 

282. 344. 
! Shrewsbury. The Earl of, 6JL 
Sicily : Anns, ns quartered by Catherine 

of Arragon, 308 ; Arms Modem, 187 : 

Postage Stamps of, 487. 
Sickle and Garb, Badge, 410, 4LL 
Sidney : Anns, 364. 

Sidnev Sussex College, Cambridge, 
364* 

Sigmaringen : Anns. 473. 
Signet Rings, 31iii. 

Silvestre de Petnisancta, introduces 
Svmbolization of Heraldic Tinctures, 
485, 

Simon. Thomas, the Seal Engraver. 402. 



INDEX. 



541 



Single Marks of Cadency, 200, 204, 2PiL 
Single Supporter, 275. 277 ; in Scottish 
Heraldry, 27'.' ; in Foreign Heraldry, 

Sinister, 16, 17, 128. 

Siradia, Province of Poland : Arms, 

467. 
Six-foil, 15, 

Sixth Son ; his Modern Difference, 20iL 
Skinners' Company and Hall. 309. 
Slater, Mr.; his Restoration of St. 

Patrick s Cathedral, Dublin, 4_9_L 
Sleford, Canon John, 103, 387. 
Sleswick : Arms, 311. 
Slipped. 8L 

Small Charges, Semee, or in Orle, 178 : 
their numbers reduced, 178 : borne 
single, 17_H, 200, 204. 

Smith, William. Biahop of Lincoln, 
36L 

Smythe, Sir William, 338. 
Snake, 6JL 

Snowdon, Scottish Herald, 1 12. 
Soaring, *7. 

Society of Antiquaries of London : Anns, 

3fi3. 

Somerset, diaries, Earl of Worcester, 
138. 

Somerset, John. Duke of, 199. 

Somerset, the Dukes of, 248; Sup- 
porters, 28L 

Somerset, Herald, 111. 

Sophia, the Princess, 251. 

Southacre, Brass at, 72, 1 15. 

South wark, St. Saviour's Church at, 
336.46L 

" Souticns. L a, ' 4ii8. 

Sovereign (Coin), 417. 

Spain : Arms, Supporters, Standard, and 
Ensign, 478. 

Spain, Philip of, 3UL 

Spanish Inquisition : Anna. 405. 

Spear, 52, 123. 

Spencer, Henry, Arms, 192. 

Spencer, tin? Earl, 32, 192 ; Supporters, 
28_L See Despencer. 

Spilsby, Brass at, 175, 170. 27JL 

Springing, 82, 

Spur, 52_; Varieties of, 52, See Mullet. 

and page 4St'». 
SS„ Collar of, 128, 258, 337, 492; Sup- 

posed Origin, :'.:'»" . See Collar. 
Stafford, Estaffordc : Arms, 139, 4G0; 

Badges, 285 : Canton, 209. 
Stafford, Edmund de, Bishop of Exeter, 

IiL 

Stafford, Henry, Lord, U±L 205. 
Stafford, Humphrey, K.&lt;J.. 201, 209, 

336 ; Crest, 208 ;' Garter-Plate. 204. 
Stafford, Jerningham. Baron : Supporters. 

2fi£L 



i Stafford, John, Archbishop of Canter- 
bury, 21L 
Stafford, John Paul, Earl of, 285. 
Staflord, Nicholas de, 195. 
Stafford, Ralph, Lord, 389. 
Stafford, Robert de, 190, 212, 
Stafford Knot, 28, 28JL 
Stag, 02. 

Staindrop, 264, 336, 

Stall Plates of Bath, 328; of Garter, 
318, 

Stalls of Knights of Bath, 350; of K.O.. 

340: of Knights of St. Patrick, 49_L 
Stamford, Grev, Earl of : Motto, 283. 
Standard, 93, *12S, 28JL 
Standard of El ward III., of Henry of 

Bolingbroke, of the Earl of Warwick, 

of Henry VIII., of Elizabeth, 129. 

286^2811. 

! Standon, Brass at, 82, 132, 366, ML 
• Stanhope, The Earl, 2i&gt;L 
Stanley, Earl of Derby : Arms, 63, 278: 
Batlge, 263j Crest, 273, 2J5; Sup- 
porters, 2S1 . 
j Stanley, Sir John, 20JL 
; Stanley, Henry, 335. 
Stanley, Thomas, Earl of Derby, l&amp;L 
Stanton Hareourt, Effigies at, 108, 339, 
344. 
I Staple. 52, 
Stapledon, Walter do, Bishop of Exeter 
212. 

Stapleton : Rebus, 52* 
Star, 7_L 

Star of India, Order of, 350. 

Stargard, Arms, 312. 

Stars of Orders : Bath. 348, 359; Garter, 

341 : St. Michael and St. George, 350; 

St. Patrick, 346; Star of India, 3^2 ; 

Thistle, 345. 
Statant, 82. 

Stationers' Company, 370. 
Steel Cap, 52, 

Stephen: Arms. 295 : Badge, 07. 293, 

294 ; Anns of Consort, 3JJ6, 
Stettin : Arms, 312. 
Stirrup, 52, 

Stock of a Tree, 70, gfife 
Stoke Daubernon, LLL 
Stoke Lyne, Lord of the Manor of, 
225. 

Stormark : Arms, 31 1. 

Story, Richard : Arms. 2ILL 

Stourton, Lord : Crest. liiilL 

Stradaett, Slab at. 1KL 

Strange, Straungc, Estrange, L'Estrange. 

See L'Estrange. 
Strange, John le, 212, 223. 
Strange, Ix?, of Blaekmere, 1 7"». 
Strange, Le,of Knocking, 175. 
Strathern, F.uphemia. Countess of. 1 55. 



ized by Google 



542 



IN DUX. 



.Strawberry Leaves, 74_; of the Dueal 

Coronet, 101. 
Strevelyn, Sir John, 213. 
Stringed, 46, §L 
Strykeland. Wauter : Anns, 192. 
Stuart. The: Arms, 155, 463_; Motto, 

232. 

Stuart, Alan, of Ochiltree, 155. 
Stuart, Alexander, Earl of Mcnteith, 
229. 

Stuart, Arabella. 42a, 425. 
8tuart, Charles, Prince of Wales. 2511 
Stuart, Charles, Prince of Wules, 250, 
Stuart, I^avid, 155. 

Stuart, Henry. Prince of Wales. 250, 
260. 

Stuart, James, Duke of York, 25L 
Stuart, Margaret, Countess of Anjou, 
212. 

Stuart, Mary, Queen of Scotland, 386. 
Stuart, Mary, infant Duughterof James L, 

895 . 

Stuart, William, Duke of Gloucester, 
251. 

Stuart, of Bonhill, 463. 

Stuart, of Crux ton, 212, 

Stuart, of Dnvingstone, 463. 

Sturroi, Estunni : Anns, 309. 

Subordinnrios, 31. 

Subverted, 87. 

Sudborougk, Effigy at, 223. 

Snfflue, or Clarion, 42. 

Suffolk, Badge. 203. 

Suffolk, John do la Tole. K.G.. Duke 

of, 108, 344. 
Suffolk, tho Duchess of, her Effigy, 

344. 

Suleye, Sir William de, 224. 

Sun in Glory, or in Splendour, 7L. 305. 

Suns and Rosea, Yorkist Collar of, 130, 

338. See Collar. 
Super-Charge, 130. 

Supporters, Supporter, 44 Lea Supports,'' 
130. 171. 275. 468 : their Origin, 277. 
490; Introduction, 276 : By whom 
borne and how granted, 276 ; mar- 
shalled, 121; differenced, 17_L 100, 
277: Examples, 280_; Single, 2JA 
222. 

Supjwrters of England, 331, 375. 
Supporters of Scotland, 302, 414. 
Supporters of H.R.H. tho late Prince 

Consort, 315. 
Supporters of H.R.H. the Prince of 

Wales, 322. 
Supporters of the Princes and Princesses 

of the Royal Family, 331. 
Supporters, Royal, of England, 801=303 
Supporters, Scottish, 279, 280. 
Supporters in Foreign Heraldry. 138. 
Snreoat, 113^ 13L 



I Surmounted, 82, 
Surrey, Thomas, Duke of, 247. 
Surrey, De Warrennes, Earls of. Set 
Worrenne. 

Surtees' " History of Durham," engrav- 
ings of Seals in, 120, 418. 
I Sur-tout, Sur lo tout, 87_; M Brochant sur 
le tout," 465 

Sussex, Augustus Frederick, K.G., 
Duke of, 251. 

Sussex. St. John of : Seal, 405, 468. 

Sustained, Soutennee, 82. 

Sutherland, Ancient, 281. 

Sutherland, the Duke of, 74. 462 : Crest. 
273: Supporters, 23. 
: Sutherland, the Earls of, 4H2. 

Swan, 65j Biulge of De Bohuns, 2"&gt;8, 
260. 277, 304: as Supporter, 254. 261^ 
LiTT, 4m!^ in Standard of Henry IV.. 
231 ; wom by John Cower, 33iL 

Sweden and Norway : Arms, 310, 478 : 
Supporters and Flags, 478. 

Sweden, Ancient, 478 ; Modern, 47S. 

Switzerland : Anns, 171*. 

Swivel, 5JL 

Sword, 53. 

Swynebunie ; Rebus, 125. 
Swyneburne, Thomas, 132. 
Swynebunie, William, 182. 
Swynforde, Catherine : Monument in 

Lincoln Cathedral. 332. 
Symbolization of Heraldic Tinctures. 

435. 

* 

Tal*ud, 112, 13L 
Talbot : Anns, 460. 

Talbot, John, K.G., Earl of Shrewsbury, 
344. 

Talbot, Gilbert, Lord, 205, 216. 
Talbot quartering Neville, 205. 
Talbot Dog, 63, 

Tallow Chandlers' Company, 370: 
Tanfield, 232. 

Tnnkerville, John, Earl of, 216. 
Taplow, Brass ot, 60. 
Tappen, Die, 467. 
Target, 53. 
Tasselled, 87. 
Tatelow.IV, 18!). 
Tateshnll, Robert de, 208, 213. 
Tan Cross, 27. 53, 335. 
Taylboys, Wauter, 122, 
Teazle, 7JL 

Tederade, Peter : Seal, 150. 
Templars, Knights, 28, 120, 3iL 
Templars, Barristers, 334, 
Temple : Motto of, 233. 
Temple Church, 14^ 41, 54 ; Effigy at, 
12S, 

Tenants, 275, 463. 
Tendringe, Sir John, 224. 



Digitized by Google 



INKKX. 



Tcrri, John, 118, ML 

Teschen : Anna, 391. 

Tetlow, of Haughton : Aims, Crest, and 
Motto, 442, 443, 

Tewkesbury Abbey Church, 382. 

Thane, 94, iiiL 

Thebes, Siege of, LL 

Theddlethorpe, Bra.*8 at, 19.4, 

Third Son ; his M(xlern Difference, 20JL 

Thistle, 76, 132, 

Thistle, Badge of Scotland. 332. 

Thistle, Order of the, 283, 345 ; Insignia 
and Officers, 345. 

Thomas, "de Brotherton," Earl of Nor- 
folk, Marshal of England, 153, 235, 
410. 

Thomas, Second Earl of Lancaster, 235. 

Thomas Plauttigonet, M of Woodstock," 
K.G.. Duke of Gloucester and Buck- 
ingham, Earl of Essex aud Nortliamp- 
tou : Anns, 103. 241 ; Supporter, 27_7 ; 
Great Seal, 152, 403: Seals, 25S, 277, 
409 ; Arms and Monument of Consort, 

162,211,384. 
Thomas Plantagenet, K.G., Second Duke 

of Clarence. 243, 43L 
Thorpe, Sir Edward de, 109, 2G7 ; Helm, 

2G9; and his Lady, 33iL 
Throstle, 53, 
Thuringia, Arms, 313. 
Thuringia Pfalz, Arms, 313. 
Thurstan: Seal, 4U5. 
Tiercee. 8.2, 
Tiger, Heraldic, 69_± 
Tilting Spear, 53. 
Timbre, 132. 
Tincture*, 19, 20, 131, 
Tinctures, Symbolization of, 20, 485. 
Tiptoft, John, Earl of Worcester : Seal, 

228. 

Tiptoft, Joice, Lady, U4, 144, 163; Brass 

fully described, 3s; i. 
Tiptoft, Sir John, 389, 
Tong, Brass at, 3HL 
Toni, Tony, RoUrt de, 197.459. 
Toolye. Henry, U1L 
Topclyffe, De : Arms, lilL 
Topliff, Brass at, 41iL 
Torch, 53. 
Torqued, 8L 
Torrogiano, 391. 
Torse, 52, 

Torteau, Torteaux, 25, 53. 
Tortoise, GG. 
Tournee, 82. 
Tours, Eustace de, 1^23, 
Towered, 87. 
Trade Brands, 118. 
Transfixed, Transpierced, 87. 
Transfluent. 88. 
Transmuted, 88. 



Transposed, 88. 
Traversed, 88, 

Treatment, Heraldic, of Figures, De- 
vices, and Compositions, 448. 
Trefleo, 53, 88. 
Trefoil, 70; slipped, 2fL 
T re-os. Do, 213. 
Treillc, Trellise, 53, 
! Tremain : Arms, 125. 
! Trent, the River, LLL 
Tressell, 25 ; for this, read FresselL 
Tressurc, 32, 53; its first appearance, 
32: impnledT 32, 145, 163, 299: 
uartered, 144 : adopted by the 
tuarts. 155; borne for Augmentation, 
435, 403. 
TricktxL 88, 

Tricolour of France, 470. 
Tri corporate, 88. 

Trinity College, Oxford : Anns and 

Crest, 362. 
Tiinity College, Cambridge: Arms, 363. 
Trinity Hall, Cambridge : Arras, 363. 
Trinity House, London : Ensign, 52; 

Arms and Crest, 306. 
Tripping, Trippant, 62, 88, 
Triton, 08. 
Trononee, 88. 

Trotton, Brass at, 52^ 107, 336. 
Tnimi&gt;et, 54.125. 
Trumpingdon, Brass at, 181. 
Trumpingdou, Sir Giles de, 181 
Trutnpingdon, Sir Roger de, 54, 10L&gt;i 

125, UiL 
Tnmeheon, 132. 
Tnmked, 88. 

Tnisstnl, Tnissing, 88. « 

Trusscll, Sir Warren, 125. 

Tudore, Cadency of the, 249 : Badge, 
50; Colours, 114, 129; Rosea, 76, 
338 : Shields of, 378; Standards, 122. 

Tudor, Arthur, K.G., Prince of Wales, 
59, 249: S*-als, 259, 414; his Monu- 
ment in Worcester Cathedral, 40, 75, 
260,261, 386. 

Tud-»r, Edmund, " of Hadham," Earl of 
Richmond, 249. 

Tudor, Edward, nominally Prince of 
Wales, 25Q. 

Tudor, Henry, Earl of Richmond, 24k 
See Henry VII. 

Tudor, Henrv, Duke of York and 
Prince of Wales, 249, 250. See 
Henry VIII. 

Tudor, Jaspar, K.G.. Earl of Pembroke 
and Duke of Bedford, 219 : Seals. 
412. 413. 

Tun, 54. 

Turkey : Arms and Flag, 479. 
Tyndall : Crests, 212. 
Tynes, 02. 



3 



ized by Google 



544 



INDEX. 



Ufford, D' : Arms, liiO. 

Ughtred, Sir Thomas, 185, 

Ulriek, K.G., Duke of Holstein, 425, 

Ulster King-of-Arms, 50, 111 ; Arms, 

305 . 

Ulster: Bodge, 5G, 94, 132. 

Ulster : Arms, Ki&lt;j, 230, 247, 308, UH ; 

Label. 23L 238. 
Ulster, Do Burg, of, 232. 
Ulster, KHzabeth do Burg, of, 23iL 
Ulster, Richard de Burg, Earl of, 10JL 
Ulster, John de Burg, of, 406. 
Umbrated. Adumbrated, 88. 
Umphraville, D' : Arms, 181, 215, 
Undee. Undv, 18, g&amp; 
Ungulcd. 88, 

Unicorn, 68_; Supporter, 08, 281 : Sup- 
porters of SeotlantL 280, 302, 303, 
414; Supporter of Great Britain, 308, 
331. 

Union Device of Great Britain, 03; 
Augmentation of the Arms of the 
Duke of Wellington, 93, 436. '443, 
4fi2. 

Union Flag of Great Britain, 97, L10, 
1. r ). r ). 

Union Jack : the First, 26, 27, 290: the 

Second, 26, 27, 220. 
Universities of Oxford and Cambridge : 

Arms, 360, 362. 
University College, Oxford : Arms, 360. 
Unmarried Ladies : Arms, 145. 
Upholders' Company, 370. 
Upton, Nicholas ; his Treatise, 109. 
Uriant. 82, 88. 

Ursius, Susan of : Arms, 308. 
Urswick, Sir Robert D', 128. 
Usher of Black Rod, 313. 
Utting, Mr. R. B. ; his excellent Wood 
Engravings of Heraldic Subjects, 
, 38JL 452, 

Vacha, Sir Richard de la, 22L 

Yair, 20, 51; in Early Shields, 108. 

Valence, De: Arms, 32, 65j Original 
Arms, 188 ; the Orle of Martlets, 188 : 
dimidiating Clarcmonte Nesle, 14S ; 
quartered bv Hastings, 161. 172: 
Bordure of, 215_i Label of, 224. 

Valence, Aymcr de, Earl of Pembroko : 
Effigy and Monument, 98, 148, 385, 
387: his Countess, 361, " 

Valence, Ethelmar de. Bishop of Win- 
chester, 188. 

Valence, Guy de, 18JL 

Valence, William de. Earl of Pembroke ; 
his fino diapered Shield of Champleve" 
Enamel, 38, fFronlupieee) ; Mr. Ber- 
rington's full-size fee-simile En- 
graving of it, 486; his Effigy decorated 
with small Enamelled Shields of his 



Arms, 52, 465 : his Monument in 

Westminster Abbey, 385. 387. 
Vambraoe, 54. 
Vamnlate, 51, 
Vandals : Ensign of, 310. 
Varied Fields, 35. 
Vasa, of Sweden L Arms, 47S. 
Vaux, De : Arms, 107. 
Vavasour, Mauger lo : 8t als. 404. 405 ; . 

Arms, 4 50. 
Vaus, Sir John, 187. 
Vaus, Sir William, 187. 
Vaux, Do : Anns, 107. 
Vavasour, Mauger le : Seals, 404. 405 ; 

Arms, 450. 
Venice, Heraldic Slab from, 258. 
Vcrdee, Verdoy, 88. 
Verdon, John de, 108. 
Verdun. Theobald de, 406. 
Vere, De : Arms and diapered Shield, 

38, 73j Mullet, 47, 200. 
Vere, Sir Robert de : his Effigy at Sud- 

borough, 221L 
Vere, Aubrey de : his differenced Shield, 

201. 

Vere, Hugh de : his Bordure, 20L. 215. 
Vere, John de, K.G., Earl of Oxford, 
167. 200. 

Vere, Robert de, Earl of Oxford : Great 
Seal, 112, 

Vere, Robert de, K.G., Duko of Ireland 

and Marquess of Dublin, 117. 434. 
Verney : Arms, 205. 
Vernon : Arms, 401 ; Motto, 124. 
Vert, 10, 132, 
Werted, Reverted, £8. 
Verulam, The Earl of, 185, 
Verules, 54, 

Vervels, Varvels, 54j Vervelled, Var- 

velled, 88, 
Vesci, William de, 22. 
Vested, 88, 

Vestments, Episcopal, charged with 

Heraldic Insignia, 218. 
"Vetusta Monumenta," Reference to, 

122. 
Vexillum, 49, 

Victoria Cross, Order of the, 132, 353. 
View, 132. 
Vigilant, 89. 

Vintners' Company and Hall, Bfl9. 

Vipont, John de, 196. 

Viscount : Rank, Style, and Title, 133: 

Coronet and Robes, 133, 488: Sons 

and Daughters, 132. 
Viscountess, 133. 
Visitations, Heralds', 132, 
Voided, 89 ; Cross, 2K 
Voiders, 32, 
Vol, 64, 
Volant, 89, 



by Google 



INDEX. 



545 



Vorant, 80. 
Vulned, 82. 

Wndknm College, Oxford : Anns, 3G2. 
Wako, of Lydel : Anns, 195 ; the pro- 

bablo soiiree of the York Label, •240. 
Wake, Sir Hugh, 2IL 
Wake, Margaret. Countess of Kent, 2iO_ 
Wake, Margaret, wife of Sir Philip de 

Gairtenny, 22i 
Wake, Thomas, Lonl, '■&gt; &gt;() 
Wake, Thomas de Holland, K.G., Lord, 

2-27, 212. 

Wake Thomas de Holland, K.G., Earl 

of Kent, and Boron, 247. 
Wake and Onuond Knot. '284. 
Waldeby, Thoinaa, Archbishop of York, 

100. 387. 
Wuldemar IL, of Denmark, 355. 
Wales: Arms of tho Principality, 59, 

250. 324, 393 ; quartered by tho 

Prince of Wales, 325. 
Wales. North : Arms, 225 ; South : Arms, 

325. 

Wales : Budges, 306, 332. 

Wales, Edward, styled Prince of, 23L 

Wales, Prince of, the Mack Prince, tho 

First, 222, 
Wales. Princes of, Plautngoneta, 237; 

Tudors, 250_; Stuarts, 250; the present 

Royal Family, 250, 252 ; their Libels, 

230. 

Wales, Prince of : Earl of Chester, 74, 322. 
Wales, Prince of : Coronet, 321 ; Feather 

Badge, 2G0. 
Wales, Charlotte, Princess of, 250. 
Wales, HJL1L Albert Edward, K.G., 

K.S.I.. Prince of, 252, 322, 
Wales, H.R.H. Alexandra, Princess of, 

325. 

Wales, H.R.H. Albert Victor, of, 252. 
Walford, Mr., on the Effigy of Sir Arnold 

de Gaveston, 157. 
Wnlkefaro. Sir Robert de, 2ilL 
Walled, Murallee, g9_ 
Waller, Messrs. ; their noble Work on 

Brasses, 25JL 
Wallenstein, Duke of Friedland : Arms, 

ififi. 

Wallingford, Abbot of St. AJban's, 26JL 

Walpole. Sir Edward, 347. 

Walah, John. 19JL 

Walaho, Thomas de, 212* 

Walthamstowe, 366. 308. 

Wantage, 343. 

Warbleton, 0JL 

Ward, Soth, Bishop of Salisbury, 312. 
Warham. Archbishop, 100. 
Warre, John, 182, 
Warre, John de la, 183. 
Warre, William de In, 1S3. 



Warrenne, Warren, do, Earls of Warren 
and Surrey: Diapered Shields, 38j 
their connection with Castlo Acre 
Priory, 360; their Arms quartered by 
tho Duke of Norfolk, 79, 112, 108 : 
Labels of, 224, 240_; Shield of, com- 
pounded with the Arms of St. John 
405,123, 

Warrenne, John de, Earl of Surrey : Sea!. 
405. ' 

Warrenne, Joan de, Countess of Sum v : 

Seal, 150, 405, 
Warrenne, Sir William de : Canton. 20JL 
Warrenne, Richard Plantageuct, Duke 

of, 240, 

Warwick, the Benuchamp Chapel in the 
Church of St. Mary at, and its Monu- 
ments, 170, 203, 344. 387. 304. 

Warwick, the Benuehamps. Earls of. 170. 
202. 

Warwick, Richard Bcauchamp, K.G., 
Earl of, 107, 209; Badge, 03, 250, 394: 
Coronet, 104j Crest, 104, 256j Sup- 
portors, 278, 279; Standard, 2K9. 

Warwick, Thomas Bcauchamp, K.G.. 
Enrl of, 113; Crest, 209_j his fine 
Brass at Warwick, 250. 

Warwick, the Nevilles, Earls of. 107. 
»s&gt;e Neville of Raby. 

Warwick, Richard Neville, K.G., Earl 
of, liiL 

Warwick, Anne Neville, of, 106, 30§, 
Warwick, Edward Plantagenet, Enrl of. 
24S. 

Warwick, George Plantagenet, Earl of. 
216. 

Warwick Roll, 166, 308. 
Wassingstone, Roger de, 194. 
Wator-ltouget, 51» 
Watcrford, See of, 55. 
Waterloo Medal, 353. 
Wattled. MIL 
Wavy, 18. 8JL 

Wax-Chandlers' Company, 370. 

WaynhVte, William de, Bishop of Win- 
chester, 107. 

Weavers' Company, 320. 

Welle, Sir John do, 193; John de, 2JA 

Welle, Robert de, U&amp; 

Wellcslcy : Arms, 461. 

Wellesley, Richard, K.G., tho Marquis, 
436. 

Wellington, Arthur Wellesley, K.G . 
Duke of, 27, 93, 430, 443, 461_j his 
Paternal Difference, 207 ; Crest, 273. 
274 ; SupjKirUrs, 2SO, 

Wellyngtone, Sir Edmund de, 202. 

Wemsley, IS. 

Wendell*, ILLL 

Wermesley, Thomas de, 192. 
Westley Waterless, Brass at, 197. 

2 N 



ized by Google 



:»4G 



INDEX. 



. Westminster Ablicy : Arms of, 40, 36Q : 
Heraldry of Henry III. and Edward L 
at, 12, 15. 377. SiTS : Confessor's Arras 
at, 126, 186, 378j Shield or England 
at, Gl_; Franco Ancient at, 74, 189 : 
France Modern at, 207. 378 : Heraldry 
of Henry V. at, 378j Heraldry of 
Henry VI I. at, 37JB ; Royal Monuments 
at, 383, 380. 
Westminster, Dean and Chapter : Arms, 
360. 

Westminster, City of: Arms, 366. 
Westminster Hall : Arms of the Confessor 

at, 12Jk Koval Shield of Richard II. 

at, 162, 400; Budges of Ricliard H. 

at. 2_03_. 45 t ; A njrel Supporters in the 

trussed Roof of, 400j Heraldry of, 377, 

am 

Westminster, Heraldry of the New 
Pnlace at, 111. 

Westmorland, Earl of, 264, 262. See 
Neville. 

Weston e, John de, 215. 

Wcstphnlcn, of Saxony : Arms, 460. 

Westphalia: Arms, 200,313. 

Whatton, Shield of Effigy at, 212, 213. 

Wheat-Ears, II ; Radge of Abbot John 
do Wh» nthamp.stodo, and his appro- 
priate Motto, 453, 457. 

Wheathampstodc, John, Abbot of St. 
Alban's : Arms, 12 ; Arms of his Abbey 
differemv-d by him, 218 : Chantry and 
its fine Shields, 453, 45" : Radge and 
Motto. 453, 457. 

Wheathamstead, Brass at, 454. 

Whitchurch, 341. 

White Roar: Radge, 332. 

White Carmelites : Seal, ill. 

White Elephant, Order and Insignia of, 
356. 

White Hart : Radge, 258. 263. 278. 304. 

White Hind : Radge, 277. 

Whitworth, Effigy at, 33. 

Widow ; her Arms, 115. 

Widow of Peer ; her Arms, MS. 

Wiilower ; his Arms, 144. 

Widvillo, Woodville, Elizabeth, Queen 
Consort of England, 244 ; her Aug- 
mented Arms, 165, 3Q&amp; 

Widvillo, Richard, K.G., Earl Rivers, 
244: Mantling, JUL; Arms, 2BL 

Wigtonc, John de, 215. 

William Li imputed Arms, 203, 295 ; 
Arms of Consort, 306. 

William II., imputed Arms, 295: Mo- 
nument in Winchester Cathedral, 
384. 

William III. : Arms, 208: Coins, 418: 
Standard, 301 ; Arms of Cousort, 
288. 



William IV. : Anns, 300 : Anns of Con- 
sort, 313, 3J_L 

William Plantagenet, " of Hatfield," 
237: Effigy and Monument, 102. 237. 

m&gt; 

William Stuart, E.G., Duke of Glou- 
cester, 251 : Garter-Plate, 251_, 328. 
William Henry, Duke of Gloucester, 25L 
William Frederick, Duke of Gloucester, 

William de Longespeo, Earl of Salis- 
bury, 225j Arms, 60, 89, 154j Seals, 
403, 412; Monument and Effigy in 
Salisbury Cathedral, 3S5. 

William de Roniare HI., Earl of Lincoln ; 
Seal. 403. 

Willoughby d'Erosby, Lady. 175 : Lord, 

his Helm and Crest-wnath, 'JTQ. 
Willoughby, Sir John, 2&amp;L 
Willoughby : Arms, 45'.'. 
Willoughby, Robert. Lord Rroke, 205. 
Wimborne Minster, 344. 
Wimington, Brass at, 191, 262. 
Winchelsea, 382. 

Winchester Cathedral : Monuments, 157. 

1SS, 3S4 : Chantry of Bishop Langton, 

123 ; despoiled Slabs, 304. 
Wineljcstor, See and Bishops of, 33, 06 : 

Bishops Prelates of the Garter, 342 
Winchester School : Arms, 3tt4. 
Winchester, Roger de Quincey, Earl of, 

107. 4113. 

Winchester, Saer de Quincey, Earl of, 
212. 

Windsor, Chapel of St. George at. dAlh 
37JL See Garter, Order of, and Stall- 
plates. 

Windsor, Dean of, Registrar of tho 

Garter, 313. 
Windsor Herald, ILL 
Winged, 80. 
Wingfield, 344^ 3SJL 
Winnowing Fan. 5_L 282. 
Winterton, The Earl of, 22. 
Winwick. Brass at, 1 32. 
Wiston, Brass at, 262. 
Wivcnhoe, Brass nt, 304. 
Woburn, Brass nt, 369. 
Wodehouse, The Baron, 2J4, 131. 
Wodettock, WomLtnrk : Rebus, 76, 200, 

30_L &amp;eEdmond and Thomas "of 

Woodstock." 
Woodward, the Rev. John, M.A. : his 

Paper in " Notes and Queries *' on the 

Anns of Leon, 490. 
Wootton under-Edgc. Rmssat, 68, 335, 
Worcester Cathedral : Effigy of Lady, 52 ; 

Beauchamp Monument, 1 70 ; Effigy 

and Monument of King John, 384 : 

Tudor Chantry. 40. 75, 200, 3&gt;r, : 

Heraldic Tiles, 37s, 



Google 



INDEX. f)47 



Worcester, the Bishops and See of, 359. 
Worcester College, Oxford, 3G1. 
Worcester, John Tiptoft, Earl of: Seal, 
278. 

Worcester, Charles Somerset, Earl of, 
438. 

Works on " Heraldry," 4 S3. 

Wreath, 100, 133; Wreathed, 89. 

Wreath; Crest, 2G5. 

Wright, Mr. ; his new Version of the 

Caerlaverock Roll, 482, 487. 
Wriothsley, Garter; his Arms home by 

the College of Anns, 304. 
Wurtemhurg : Arms, Supporters, Flag, 

479. 

Wydcvil, John do: Crest. 271. 
Wykehom, Williom de. Bishop of Win- 
chester ; his Pastoral Staff, 49. 
Wyloughby, De : Arms, 4G0. 
Wynne, Sir W. W., G3. 
Wyvern, 08. 

Yarmouth, Great. Sre Great Yarmouth. 

York : Arms of the See, 358. 

York : the Archbishop of, his Rank, 

Style, Title, and Precedence, 91, 90, 

420. 

York, the Dean and Chapter of, 3G0. 



York Cathedral, 100, 102, 237, 385. 
York, Church of St. Cross at, 300. 
York. City, 300. 

York, Elizabeth of, 100, 308, 384. 
York, Edmond, First Duke of. 239, 
241. 

York, Edward, Second Duke of, 243. 
York, Richard, Third Duke of, 245. 
York. Edward, Fourth Duke of, '245. 
York, Richard, Fifth Duke of, 240. 
York, Frederick, Duke of, 251. 
York, James, Duko of, 251. 
York Herald, 111. 
York, Label of, 240. 

York, Badge and Collar of, 134. 338. 
339. 

York, Roses of, 75, 70, 2007303. 304, 
305. 

Youghal: Seals of tho Borough, 147. 
Young, Sir Charles George, Garter King 

of Arms, 341. 
Younger Sons, Arms of, 143. 

Zoucho, do la : Differenced Shields. 173 ; 

Badge, 201. 
Zouehe, Alan do la; 217. 
Zoucho, Mnud de la, 247. 
Zowche, Le Sr. la, 209. 



ADDENDA AND CORRIGENDA. 

Pago 3*.— In line 6, for Richard I., read Ricuard II. 

m 65.— In line 26, for Karl of, read Baron. 

6*.— In line 13, for dexter, read sinister. 

„ 75 — In line 14, for Tn-ww-1, rend Fre** 1. 

.. 87.— Add to last line a reference to pajre 4**. 

„ 123.— In line 13, for Ramrydge, read Ramrygi*. 

,. 134.— In 1/ift line, for No 46, read No. 4h. 

,. 135.— To second line add references to pp. 15 u , 170. 

„ 162.— The fin-t IHajrraru is No. 329 B. 

„ 229.— Bead Moi.tMviurrn, and IIari-iir. 

„ 230.— In fir*t line, for No. 407, read No. 4*7. 

„ 236.— In l ift lino hut two, for Holland of Kent, read W'udettoek of Kent. 

„ 249. — To line 24, add referent** to pp. 74, 303. 

„ 277. - In line 22, for No. 502, read No. 509. 

„ 350. — AB&lt;*r line in, inwrt— " Dean of the Order, the iVan of W»wtmin&amp;t&lt;T." 

H 4ii6. — In line 1, for Kdward II., read Fdwaud I. 

„ 406 The wood-cut or the seal of Matilda de FUllol is printed reversed. 

„ 446. - In line 30. for Furhoon,ht[R, rend Kcrhodnji-k. 

„ 446.— To la*t line add. " No. 731. p. 506.." 

. ML— In line I, for No. 725. read No. 730. 

„ 481.-ln line 2, tor No. 725, mid No. 730. 

Plate XII.- For No. 339 a, read No. 339 c. 
XXX VI.— For No. 5GH. read No. r.r.« a. 
LXXXIL- For MoNT.*&lt;jtTK, read MoNTAtmt. 



^ *&gt;5t 0% 

* Digitized by Google 



LONDON . 

rniMrn nt tt. ci/wf-s and fovs, stamfw.d stkfc^ 

&gt;M&gt; fllAKIXG Cit&lt;*s. 



Digitized by Google 



Digitized byCoogTe 



IZfcXJ Uy VjlJU 



gle 



■ \ 



Digitized by Google 



 