
This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 
to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 
to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 
are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 
publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 

We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain from automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attribution The Google "watermark" you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 



at |http : //books . google . com/ 




6000227070 



r 



HERALDRY, 

HISTOEICAL AND POPULAR 



DIAPER AND CADENCY. 



\ &gt; xv; 




' "III. 



!;•!■ I. '.Ill -I ' W'-.'t.iir ;;:r'! \;l""." 



HERALDRY, 



HISTORICAL AND POPULAR 



BT 

CHARLES BOUTELL. M.A., 

▲DTHOI OF 
* MOlTDMCirrAL BItABSn Ain&gt; 0LAB8," " THE MONTTMniTAL BSAMBB OF BraLAMD," 

" CHKLemxs MOMxncKirra zk bkoland akd walks," 

** ▲ MAVDAL OF BKITISH ▲BCHJK)LOOT,'* 
BTO. no. ROi 



WITH NINE HUNDRED AND SEVENTY-FIVE lUUvSTKATlONS. 



* AM the devkes blaicned oo the AUd 
In Uwtr own tlncL" 

lOTLLB Of THS KlVO. 



TB//i/) KlilTlON, RHViSKU AND ENLAlHiEl). 




LONDON: 

KHiHAHD BKNTLEY, NEW BURLINC^TON STREET, 

1864. 



J2/6'^ ^ / 




LONDOH: printed BT WILLIAM CLOWES and sons, STAMFORD 8TRSBT 
AND CRABINO 0RO88. 



PREFACE 



THE FIBST EDITION. 



It is the aim of this Volume to inquire into the true character 
and right office of Heraldry, and to desoribe and illustrate its 
general condition as it is in use amongst ourselves. 

Of the rise and progress of Heraldry, and of its almost nni- 
yersal prevalence under variously modified forms, I have not 
attempted to give more than a slight and rapid sketch. I have 
been content also to refer only incidentally and in a few words 
to the value and interest of Heraldry, as a handmaid of History, 
as an ally of Art, and as the chronicler of Archsaology — inj 
purpose being not so much to lead students on to the applica^ 
tion of Heraldry, as to enable them to apply it by becoming 
Heralds. In the following pages, accordingly, I have sought 
to define and elucidate the principles of Heraldxy, to exemplify 
its practice, and to illustrate at once its utility and its attrac- 
tiveness. The Heraldry of the present time I have desired 
uniformly to exhibit as the direct descendant and the living 
representative of the Heraldry of the past; and the student 
will observe that I have systematically endeavoured to impress 
him with the conviction that Heraldry is, essentiaUy and at 
all times, inseparably associated with History, or at any rate 
with Biography. 



VI PREFACE TO THE FIB8T EDITION. 

This Volume does not profess to extend its range to legendary 
Heraldiy, nor does it include even references to those fanciful 
and often fantastic speculations, in which the early Heralds 
delighted to indulge. The ''OwriosUies of Heraldry" in like 
manner, it leaves, with gratefal and admiring acknowledgment, 
in the accomplished hands of Mr. Mabk ANTHomr Lower. Be- 
peated references to standard works upon Heraldry I have con- 
sidered to be neither necessary nor desirable, but instead of 
this, I have prepared and inserted a complete list of heraldic 
authorities; and in the preparation of my pages I have been 
scrupulously careful that every statement contained in them 
should be based upon certain and approved authority. 

Historical Heraldry occupies a position of such importance 
in Histories of England, that a certain amount of heraldic 
knowledge has become indispensable to the student of English 
History. 

Every Gothic Architect ought to be a thorough Herald. 
Heraldry alone can enable him to render his works, in the 
noblest and most perfect sense, historic monuments. Without 
Heraldry, no lover of the great Art, which has been so happily 
revived amongst us, is able either to feel the full power of 
what the Gothic has transmitted to him from the olden time, 
or to realize all that it is now able to accomplish as a living 
Art. 

Historical Painters, having at length learned to estimate 
aright the worth of archasological accuracy, constantly re- 
quire that information which Heraldry is ever ready to 
impart. 

It is the same with Sculptors, when they treat of subjects 
that are derived from either mediteval or modem History, 
or that are in any way associated with Gothic Arohiteo- 
tnre. 

To Illuminators, Heraldry opens a wide and richly diversi- 
fied field of attractive study. The beautiful and deservedly- 



FBEFAGE TO THE FIB8T EDITION. Vll 

popular Art of ninmination finds in Heraldry a most Yereatile 
and efficient confederate. True Illumination, indeed, is in its 
nature heraldic; and true Heraldry provides for niuminators 
the most appropriate, graphic, and effective, both of their sub- 
jects and of the details and accessories of their practice. 

In some sense or degree, also, Heraldry enjoys the favour of 
the general public. To many persons, as to seal engravers and 
herald painters, it provides what may be styled a profession. 
Whoever has, or desires to have, a *' coat-of-arms," professes to 
know something about Heraldry ; that is, he is favourably dis- 
posed towards it, though perhaps he is unconscious of the 
sentiment. It is always pleasant to the pedestrian public — 
many of them bearers of time-honoured arms and having the 
reddest of red blood flowing in their veins — to be familiar with 
the heraldic blazonry that appears upon the panels of aristo- 
cratic carriages. Nor is it less satis£Eustory, when we chance 
to see a flag displayed and blowing out in the breeze, or when 
our eyes rest upon an heraldic seal, or when we discover a 
shield of aims in a book, or on a monument, or amidst the 
decorative accessories of some building, to be able to read what 
Heraldry thus has written with her peculiar symbols. And 
then, as a matter of course, Heraldry, as of old, receives a 
becoming homage from the wealthy inheritors of historic names 
and noble titles; while a similar homage is no less cordially 
tendered by those whose Heraldry, like their own position in 
the great world of society, is at least of comparatively recent 
growth. 

From each and all of these Friends of Heraldry, this Volume 
ventures to anticipate a welcome, inasmuch as it aspires to 
place before them, in a plain and simple form, whatever 
heraldic teaching they may require; and also because, as a 
book of reference, they will find it to be trustworthy, easy 
to be consulted, and, as fiur as it professes to go, complete. 



PREFACE 



TO 



THE SECOND AND THIRD EDITIONS. 



If ever 1 had indulged the hope that a Second Edition of this 
work might be required, I certainly had not contemplated the 
realization of any such speculation without an interval of several 
years between the publication of the First Edition and the 
appearance of its successor. My surprise, accordingly, was as 
great as my gratification, when I found myself called upon by 
my original publishers, before my First Edition had been pub- 
lished two months, to prepare for them a Second Edition with all 
possible speed. 

The corrections and additions that I was anxious to make, so 
far as I was enabled to accomplish them at all, were made while 
my Second Edition was actually passing through the press. 
Materials in abundance were ready at hand; and indeed the 
cordial generosity with which the most valuable assistance, often 
unasked, has constantly been placed at my disposal, I am alto- 
gether unable adequately to acknowledge. From such great 
kindness, coupled with the very gratifying reception that my 
&lt;* HfiRALDKT " has experienced, I venture to infer that my Volume, 
however imperfectly executed, has been conceived in the right 
spirit. 



PREFACE TO THE SECOND AND THIBD EDITIONS. IX 

Whatever errors and omissions in the First Edition had been 
brought to my notice, it was my endeayour in the Second Edition 
to correct and supply : at the same time, I was constrained to 
withhold yarions additions that had been suggested to me, in 
consequence of being unable to extend my Yolume beyond 
certain prescribed limits. Whatever fresh matter was intro- 
duced, was carefully kept in conformity with my original plan, 
and in itself it was what I hoped would prove to be both useful 
and attractive to students of Historical Heraldry. The Chapter 
on '* Marshalling " was considerably extended ; and two Chapters 
instead of a single one were assigned to " Cadency :" the number 
of the Chapters, however, remained the same, since two very 
short Chapters of the First Edition were united together. The 
Illustrations in the Second Edition received numerous important 
additions. 

About a year after the first appearance of this work, the 
Second Edition was exhausted, and at the same time the copy- 
right passed from the hands of Messrs. Winsor and Newton 
to those of Mr. Bbntlet, the eminent publisher of New Burling- 
ton Street. This Third Edition, now published by Mr. Bentley, 
I have most carefully revised and corrected throughout; and it 
has received many additions of the greatest importance. To all 
points connected with heraldic rule, authority and early usage, 
I have directed my special attention. The Chapters previously 
entitled " Marshalling " and '* Cadency," now appear, enlarged 
and rearranged, severally bearing the following titles — ^*'Mar 
shalling and Inheritance," and '* Cadency and Differencing/' 
Chapter XVI. has been devoted exclusively to " Eoyal Cadency," 
which has been treated in it in as systematic a manner as 
possible. The Chapter on the " Eoyal Heraldry of England " 
has been in part re-written; and the Chapter on ''Foreign 
Heraldry " has been considerably extended. 

Again I have introduced several fresh Hlustrations. They 
consist of tweniy-four additional wood-cuts, printed with the 



X PUEFACE TO THE SECOND AND THIRD EDITIONS. 

text; and four lithographic Plates, ntimbered LXXIX., LXXX., 
LXXXI., LXXXII., and containing twelve examples : thns, my 
Illnstrations, in all, now nnmber upwards of nine hundred and 
seventy examples. Plate IjXXIX., engraved from a photograph 
of the original slab, which several years ago was brought from 
Venice to England, will be regarded with much interest, both 
from its peculiar heraldic character, and from the singular 
circumstances connected with its recent history, and also from 
the no less singular manner in which it was assigned to the 
individual— one of two great rivals, whose armorial insignia it 
does not display. 

I greatly regret to have been obliged again to reprint 
my original lithographs without any alteration in the num- 
bering; and also, as in the Second Edition, to intersperse 
the additional Plates amongst those that were before engraved. 
Thus, in the arrangement of the Plates the order of numerical 
succession has not been regularly maintained. I trust that the 
Lists of the Plates and of the Individual Examples in a great 
measure will rectify any inconvenience that may arise from this 
circumstance. In the text I have habitually inserted a reference 
to the Plate in which each example is placed, except in the oaae , 
of those examples that are printed with the text itself. Many 
of the Illustrations that I have obtained frx&gt;m monumental 
memorials, have been engraved by StoTHARD and others ; but 
I have not considered it necessary to refer to the Plates in those 
more costly and less accessible works, in whicli the Heraldry is 
subordinate to the monumental character of the subject repre- 
sented ; and as, with rare exceptions, I have myself personally 
examined the originals, I have generally been enabled to rely 
upon my own notes and sketches for the fidelity of my examples. 
I feel sure that my additional examples from the grand old Abbey 
Church of St. Alban will continue to be regarded with the 
utmost interest, (Nos. 633, 690, and 711 to 717 inclusive). 
Plates XIX. and XXIII. have been lithog^phed again, since the 



PREFACE TO THE SECOND AND THIBD EDITIONS. Zl 

publication of my First Edition, and the former Plate has been 
re-arranged. It will be understood that No. 364 a., in Plate 
XXIIL, has been drawn in exact conformity with the original 
shield. My chroma-lithograph, Plate YIL, of the noble chamjplevS 
enamel shield of Earl Wiluam de Valence, has also been en- 
graved, a second time, in order to render with exact accuracy 
the diaper upon the bars that are argent. I have elsewhere 
(see Chap. XXXIII.) noticed the publication of the fao-simile 
chromo-lithograph of this shield, of the full size of the original, 
after his own drawing, by Mr. L. Berbington, of Westminster 
Abbey. 

The publication of Mr. Seton's able and thoroughly heraldic 
treatise on the Heraldry of Scotland, confirms my belief that a 
feeling for Historical Heraldry is gradually extending its influence 
throughout this country. It will rest with those to cherifih and 
to stimulate such a feeling, who have already learned to value 
Historical Heraldry because they have formed a just estimate of 
its true character. The " HerM and QeneaHogist^^* a periodical 
publication conducted with characteristic ability by Mr. John 
GouoH Nichols, while it renders valuable aid to students of 
Heraldry, bears testimony to the prevalence of an interest in 
heraldic subjects. And I am persuaded that Mr. Papwobth's 
excellent *' Or^&amp;nary if Arms" only lequrres to be more widely 
known and more correctly understood, to be consistently appre- 
ciated, and consequently to be warmly supported. 

I venture to request from the possessors of early Bolls of 
Arms, early Grants and Confirmations, and other unpublished 
heraldic documents, such information as may enable me to form as 
complete Lists as possible of such records for future publication. 
I shall also feel truly grateful for any notices of fine examples of 
Shields of Arms, Badges, &amp;o., and any other heraldio memoranda. 
I have prepared, for the use of students of Heraldry, and others, 
several groups of plain shields, arranged in pages of the size of this 
volume, which may be filled in with the bearings of Shields of 



XU PREFACE TO THE SEOOND AND THIRD EDITIONS. 

Arms. I myself have found these pages of outline shields to 
be very useful and oonvenient, and they have been approved 
by more than one friend who loves and studies Heraldry. 
They may be obtained from the publisher of this work, printed 
on paper adapted to receive colour. 

At the College of Arms I have always found the most valuable 
aid ready to be given to me with the greatest liberality and 
kindness ; and I also have invariably experienced at the hands 
of the professional Heralds the most generous encourage- 
ment, coupled with the most gratifying approvisd. To Wiluam 
CouRTHOPE, Esq., Somerset Herald, Begistrar of the College 
of Arms, I desire to tender my especial thanks; and I also 
g^tefully acknowledge the assistance I have received from 
BoBERT Laurie, Esq., Clarencieuz King of Arms. While to all 
who in any way have aided me, in general terms I offer my 
thanks, I am bound to record my more particular obligation 
to the Eev. John Woodward, of New Shoreham; to the Eev. 
Charles Brooke Bicknell, Bector of Stourton, near Bath; to 
John .Qouoh Nichols, Esq., F.S. A. ; to the Bev. H. W. Hodgson, 
Bector of King's Langley, Herts ; to T. G. Bayfield, Esq., and 
to A. W. MoRANT, Esq.^F.S.A., and F.G.S., of Norwich. 

In the First and Second Editions, the Index was divided, 
into three distinct sections ; but for this present Edition I have 
prepared a single Index, which comprehends all that was con- 
tained in the three sections that preceded it, and which also is 
much more copious in itself, and will be found calculated greatly 
to facilitate reference to the work. 

Throughout the preparation of my First Edition I constantly 
received from one valued Friend the most important assistance : 
now, to my great sorrow, I associate this present Edition with 
the cherished Memory of the same dear and deeply-lamented 
Friend. 

C.B. 
Norwood, October, 1864. 



CONTENTS. 



Pre&amp;oe to the First Edition ..... t 

Pre&amp;oe to the Second and Third Editions . . viii 

CHAPTER I. 
Introdnotory ....... 1 

CHAPTEB n. 
Heraldic Blazon, Nomendataie, Language, and Laws 8 

CHAPTER m. 
The Shield—its Pttrts, Points, and Primary Diyisions; and 
DiTiding and Border Lines . .13 

CHAPTER IV. 
Tinctoias and Fnrs ....... 19 

CHAPTER V. 
The Ordinaries and their DiminntiTes, and the Ronndles . 21 

CHAPTER VI. • 
The Heraldry of the Cross ...... 26 

CHAPTER Vn. 
The Snbordinaries ....... 31 

CHAPTER Vin. 
Varied Fields and Diapers ...... 35 



XIV 00NTBNT8. 



Plige 



CHAPTER IX. 
Mifloellaiieons Charges : Part I., Isaimnaie Objeota . .39 

CHAPTEB X. 
Misoellaiifions Charges: Part IL, Aiumaie Beings . .55 

CHAPTEB XL 
MifloellaneoTifl Charges: Part m.. Natural Objects 70 

CHAPTEB Xn. 
Descriptive Terms ....... 77 

CHAPTEB Xni. 
Miscellaneous Names and Titles, not included under the term 
"Charges" 90 

CHAPTEB XIV. 
Marshalling and Inheritance .185 

CHAPTEB XV. 
Cadency and Differencing ...... 173 

CHAPTEB XVI. 
Boyal Cadency .230 

CHAPTEB XVn. 
Badges, Crests, Snpporters, Mottoes, and Knots .254 

CHAPTEB XVin. 
Flags . • 286 

CHAPTEB TTX. 
The Boyal Heraldry of England .293 

CHAPTEB XX. 
Orders of Knighthood, and Insignia and Augmentations of 
Honour 333 



0ONTENT&amp; XV 

CHAPTER XXI. 
Official and Corporate Heraldiy ..... 357 

CHAFTEB XXn. 
Architeotoral Hezaldiy ...... 372 

CHAPTER XXIII. 
MoQiimental Heraldry . . .880 

CHAPTER XXIV. 
The Heraldry of Seals and Coins .397 

CHAPTER XXV. 
The Heraldry of Illmninations .419 

CHAPTER XXVI. 
GenealogieB ....... 422 

CHAPTER XXVn. 
Precedence ........ 428 

CHAPTER XXVin. 
Augmentation and Abatement ..... 433 

CHAPTER XXIX. 
Modem Heraldry .439 

CHAPTER XXX. 
Heraldic Treatment, Drawing, and Colour . ' . 448 

CHAPTER XXXI. 
Examples of Shields of Arms .458 

CHAPTER XXXII. 
Foreign Heraldry ....... 464 



XVI OONTENTS. 



P*ge 



CHAPTBB XXXIIL 
Supplementary .481 

LifitofFlateB . .493 

List of Illustrations. . . .496 

General Index ....... 607 



HERALDRY, 



HIBTOBIOAL AND POPULAB. 



CHAFFEE I. 

TRODUCTOKT. 



An inquiry into the Heraldry of the past leads us back almost 
to the remote fountain-head of human history. From the very 
earliest periods, we find it to have been an usage universally 
prevalent amongst mankind for both individuals and communi- 
ties to be distinguished by some Sign^ Device, or Cognizance. The 
idea of symbolical expression coupled with a love of symbolism 
appear, indeed, to constitute one of the component elements 
of the human mind, as well in the rude condition of savage 
life as in every progressive advance of civilization and refine^ 
ment. Through the agency of such figurative imagery the 
mind is able both to concentrate a wide range of thought within 
a very narrow compass, and to give to the whole a visible 
form under a simple image. The mind thus speaks to the 
eye. By this symbolical blazonry a multiplicity of definite 
impressions are conveyed, in the simplest manner, and with 
poetic impressiveness. By such means, also, the mind is em- 
powered to combine the imaginative with the real, and, while 
extending its speculations beyond the bounds of ascertained 
verities and actual facts, to impart a definite character to the 
visions of the imagination. 

The exercise of a faculty such as this, it is easy to conceive, 
would be held in the highest estimation in the primitive stages 



2 INTRODUCTORY. 

of human society. Men so circumstanced had much to say; 
but they had only rare opportunities for speaking, and they 
knew but few words in which to convey their meaning. They 
delighted, therefore, in an expressive symbolism, which might 
speak for them, laconically, but yet with emphasis and to the 
point. Their symbolical language, also, would commend itself 
to their favour in a peculiar manner, through the facility with 
which it would extend and intensify its own phonetic powers 
by means of accumulative association. 

War and the chase would naturally furnish the imagery 
that would first become prevalent. A man's physical powers or 
pecidiarities, as a warrior or a hunter, or the issue of some 
exploit in which he might have been engaged, would determine 
his distinctive personal cognizance. If swift of foot, or strong 
of hand, or fierce in demeanour, or patient of hardship, he 
would naturally seek to symbolize himself under the form of 
some animal distinguished pre-eminently for one or other of 
those qualities. For, it is natural that man should find symbols 
of his own physical attributes in the inferior animals ; because 
in mere swiftness, or strength, or such like qualities, those 
animals are superior to man. The next thing would be to 
render this personal symbolism hereditary. A man's son 
would feel a natural pride in preserving the memorial of his 
father's reputation, by assuming, and also by transmitting his 
device. It would be the same with the comrades of a chief, 
and with the subjects of a prince. Thus a system of Heraldry 
would arise and become established. 

And such is actually the process, which has produced and 
matured its own Heraldry amongst each of the various races 
and tribes of the earth. In the Far West, the Bed Indian, 
from time immemorial, has impressed upon his person the 
totem of his people — ^the cognizance that his fsithers bore, and 
by which they were distinguished before him. In the very 
constitution of his mind essentially a lover of s}*mbolism, the 



INTRODUCTORY. 3 

Oriental revels, and he always has revelled, in a truly charac- 
teristic Heraldry. In the relics of the wonderful races that 
once peopled the valley of the Nile, this Heraldry of the East 
is eveiywhere present. Another expression of the same semi- 
mystic symbolism was found, deep buried beneath the mounds 
of Assyria. Somewhat modified, it was well known in ancient 
Israel. In Europe, with the first dawn even of historical 
tradition, the existence of a Heraldry may be distinguished. 
Nearly six hundred years before the Christian era, ^schylus 
described the heraldic blazonry of the chieftains who united 
their forces for the siege of Thebes, with all the minute 
exactness of our First Edward's chronicler of Caerlaverock. 
The well-known Eagle of the Bomans may be said to have 
presided over the Heraldry of Home, as their own Dragon has / 

ever presided over that of the Chinese. The legendary annals of 
mediaeval Europe abound in traces of a barbaric Heraldry, in 
the war-banners of the chiefs and in their personal insignia. 
The Bayeux Tapestry of the Conqueror's Consort may be placed 
at the head of the early existing illustrations of the Heraldry 
of Britain. That celebrated piece of royal embroidery exhibits 
a complete display of the military ensigns in use at the period 
of the Conquest, by both the Norman invaders and the Saxon 
occupants of this island. Illuminations in MSS. take up and 
carry on the Heraldic record. Seals, carvings in ivory, monu- 
mental memorials, stained glass, and the various productions 
of the architectural sculptor, g^radually contribute their several 
memoirs, and lead us on to the full development of English 
mediaaval Heraldry through the agency of the Crusades. 

The Crusades formed the armed followers of the difierent 
European princes into a military alliance for a common pur- 
pose, and also brought the rude yet gallant soldiers of the 
West into contact with all that then existed in Eastern lands 
of the refinement, both military and social, of still earlier 
times. Among the many and important results of those 

b2 



4 INTRODUCTORY. 

strange and strangely romantic enterprises, were great changes 
in the weapons and armonr of the western chivalry ; and these 
changes were accompanied with the introdaotion of an infinite 
variety of armorial devices. The Crusade confederacy itself 
would necessarily demand the adoption, by the allied Sove- 
reigns, of a more definite system of military standards and 
insignia than had been previously prevalent. The use of im- 
proved defensive armour, also, combined with a better system of 
organization and discipline in the armour-clad bands, rendered 
it necessary for each warrior of any rank to assume and wear 
some personal cognizance, without which he could not have 
been distinguished at a time when the ascertained presence 
of certain individuals was of such grave importance. And 
the device of each baron or knight would be assigned, with 
appropriate modifications, to their respective retainers and 
followers. In this manner, Creda were introduced, and placed 
on basinets and helms ; and thus some recognized device or com- 
position was displayed upon all knightly pennons and banners, 
and was emblazoned both upon the rich surcoats which the 
knights wore over their armour, and upon the shields which 
so long formed most important components of their defensive 
equipment ' Such is the origin of SkiMs^/'Amu and Coais- 
of-AmiB, — terms that we still retain, with representations of 
the Shield, and with Crests, in our own Heraldry at the pre- 
sent day. 

In England, Heraldry may be considered to have first 
assumed a definite and systematic character during the reign of 
Henry III., a.d. 1216 to 1272 ; and at the close of the thir- 
teenth century it may be said to have been recognized as a 
distinct science. The heraldic devices that were adopted in 
England in the thirteenth century, in common with those 
which were added to them during the century that followed, 
partook of the ideal character of all symbols, but at the same 
time they were distinguished by a simple and dignified expres- 



INTRODUCTORY. 6 

siveness. And they were afisociated directly, and in a peculiar 
manner, either with individuals, families, establishments, poten- 
tates, or with the conmiunity at large: so that they may be 
considered after a definite method, their varieties readily admit 
of classification, their characteristics may be clearly elucidated 
and fully set forth, and they may be subjected to certain general 
laws and treated as forming a system in themselves. This 
classification and description, and the general laws themselves, 
we now unite with the devices and compositions under the 
common name of Heraldry. And with the Heraldry of the 
thirteenth century we associate that of the fourteenth, and of 
succeeding centuries, and of our own era, assigning to the whole 
the same common title. For, as it happened in the instance 
of Architecture, when once it had been duly recognized in 
England, Heraldry rapidly attained to an advanced degree of 
perfection. Whatever the Heralds of Edward I. might have 
left to be accomplished after their time, their successors of 
the fourteenth century were not slow in developing. Under the 
genial influences of the long and brilliant reign of Edward III., 
medicBval Heraldry attained to its culminating point. The 
last quarter of the fourteenth century proved to be equally 
favourable to the Heralds. And again, during the Lancastrian 
era, and throughout the struggle of the Boses, English Heraldry 
maintained its reputation and its popularity. Its practical 
utility was felt and appreciated by the Plantagenets in their 
fierce social wars, as it had been before their time by the Cru- 
saders. Then, with a general decline of the Arts, Heraldry 
declined. Its art-character, indeed, had shown signs of a 
coming degradation before the accession of the Tudors to the 
disputed throne of this realm. The next downward step 
seriously affected the early simplicity of the art-science, so 
that the Heraldry of the sixteenth, seventeenth, and eighteenth 
centuries can advance but comparatively slight claims upon our 
present consideration. And thus we are brought onwards to 



6 INTRODUCTORY. 

the great and general Art-Bevival of our own times, in which 
Heraldry again appears in the act of vindicating its titles to 
honourable recognition, as an Art-Scienoe that may be advan- 
tageonsly and agreeably studied, and very happily adapted, in 
its practical application, to the existing condition of things by 
onrselves. 

When thus directing the attention of students to the 
Heraldry of the past, I am anxious to impress upon them the 
remembrance of the &amp;ct, that the main object of our inquiry 
has reference to our own present use and application of 
Heraldry in the days of Queen Victoria. All true Heraldry 
is historical, though it by no means follows that it must always 
be necessarily popular. Our Heraldry, however, aspires to be 
such as may claim to be entitled both '* popular*' and "his- 
torical :" but the historical condition of our Heraldry does not 
imply that we should enter into the elucidation of mediceval 
Heraldry, purely for its own sake. We find Heraldry to have 
been in England a growth of the Middle Ages : and, conse- 
quently, when we desire to familiarise ourselves with this Art- 
Science, we are constrained in the first instance to direct our 
thoughts back to the middle ages, in order to obtain much of the 
information that we need for present use. This differs widely 
from a study of mediaeval Heraldry, undertaken and conducted 
for the sake of reproducing mediaeval Heraldiy. It is impossible 
to press this consideration too urgently, not only upon living 
Heralds, but also upon all who are interested in the Arts and 
ArtrManufactures of our country at the present day. The Arts 
of the middle ages are replete with precious teachings for our- 
selves; and yet they are not by any means calculated to be 
reproduced by us in their original condition. They were the 
Arts of those times — ^they then arose, and they flourished 
through their direct association with their own era. It is most 
true, that at all times ihey may be studied with certain 
advantage ; and it is also no less true, that a mere imitation of 



INTBODOCrORY. 7 

their former operation indicates that error in judgment, which 
ignores the all-important mutaHs muiandiSy and so leads to a 
mistaken course of action. And then, on the other hand, 
nothing can be more absurdly irrational than to reject what the 
Arts of the middle ages can teach so well, upon the alleged plea 
that any such study involves a modem medisBvalism. Here, 
as in other matters, a middle course lies open invitingly before 
us. Whatever we find to be really valuable and useful in the 
Arts of the middle ages we gratefully accept ; and, as we know 
that our predecessors in departed centuries matured their own 
thoughts for their own advantage, and applied their Arts to 
their own use, so we take their teaching, and associate it in its 
practical application, not with them, but with ourselves. When 
we seek to apply our knowledge, from what source soever we 
may have acquired it, we look around us, and we look before 
us, seeking both to adapt our knowledge to present require- 
ments, and to expand its range that it may become applicable 
to the requirements of the future. By no means content to be 
imitators and copyists, we aim at excellence in our works, 
through the judicious, consistent, and appropriate application 
of sound principles, under the guidance of an observant and 
well-disciplined experience. It will be understood, then, when 
I refer in the following pages to the Heraldry of the thirteenth 
and fourteenth centuries, that I do so without the slightest 
intention, on the one hand, to suggest that either our Guards- 
men or our Volunteers should be equipped in the armour and 
surcoats of the Plantaganets, or, on the other hand, to fix the 
standard of the Heraldry of to-day in accordance with the 
heraldic fashion prevalent when the Black Prince was invested 
with the Order of the Garter. 




A. B. 

No. 1. — ^Arms of the CBrsADEB Kings of Jbbusaleh. 



CHAPTEE'II. 

HERALDIC BLAZON, NOMENCLATURE, LANGUAGE, AND LAWS. 

In Heraldry, the term Blazon, or Blazoning, is applied 
equally to the description and to the representation of all 
heraldic figures, devices, and compositions. It also indicates 
the arrangement of the component members and details of any 
heraldic composition. Historical Blazoning, also entitled Mar- 
shaming, denotes the combination and arrangement of several 
distinct heraldic compositions, with the view to produce a single 
compound composition. In like manner, the disposition and 
arrangement of a group or groups of heraldic compositions or 
objects, is styled Marshalling. 

All heraldic figures and devices, whether placed upon shields, 
or borne or represented in any other manner, are entitled 
Charges ; and every shield or other object is said to be charged 
with the armorial insignia that may be displayed upon it. 

Heraldic Language is most concise, and it is always minutely 



HERALDIC BLAZON AND NOMENCLATUEE. 9 

exact, definite, and explicit; all nnneoessaiy words are 
omitted, and all repetitions are carefully avoided ; and, at the 
same time, every detail is specified with absolute precision. 

The Nomenclature is equally significant, and its aim is to 
combine- definitive exactness with a brevity that is indeed 
laconic. As might naturally be expected, both the Language 
and the Nomenclature of Heraldry habitually indicate their 
Norman-French origin. 

Heraldic Devices are described, first, in the order of their 
comparative importance ; and, secondly, in the order in which 
they are placed upon the shield, or other object that bears 
them. Thus the character of the surface of the shield itself, 
which forms the foundation of the heraldic composition, is first 
specified. Then follows a description of the principal charge, 
which occupies the most central aad most commanding position, 
and which also is considered to rest immediately upon the 
surface of the shield. Objects of secondary importance, which 
also rest upon the shield itself, are next described ; and finally, 
descriptions are given of such other devices and figures as may 
be placed upon another charge, and which consequently appear 
to be carried by an object that is nearer to the surface of the 
shield than they are themselves. In some instances, as when a 
Chief, a Canton, and a Bardure appear and are charged, the 
composition will require to be blazoned in two groups, pre- 
cedence being given to the central and more important group. 

In blazoning any Charge, the title, position or disposition* 
tincture, and distinctive conditions of the device or figure are 
first to be specified, and then there will succeed such descrip- 
tions of details and accessories as may be necessary, in their 
order of comparative importance : the tincture of any Charge, it 
is to be observed, is always to follow the name of the Charge 
itself; thus, a lion rampant adble, is the proper arrangement of 
the words. 

If a tincture or a number should occur twice in the same 



10 HERALDIC BLAZON, N0MENCLA1T7RE, 

sentence of any descriptive blazon, such tinctnre or number is 
to be indicated by reference to the words already nsed, and 
not by actually repeating them. Thus, should any Charge be 
of the same tincture as the field, it is said to be ^^ of the field ;*' 
or, as the tincture of the field is always the first that is specified 
in the blazon, a Charge of that tincture may be blazoned as 
" of the first:* 

So any Charge is said to he '' of the second,'' " of (he ihird," 
*' of the la^:* &amp;o. if its tincture be the same as the secondy the 
third, the last, or any other that has been already specified. 
In the instance of the metal gold, instead of reference to the 
heraldic term " Or," the word *' gdd " itself may be used. The 
position or disx&gt;osition of any Chaise or Charges are to be 
blazoned first after the name or title of the Charge or Charges. 
When the same Charge is several times repeated in the same 
composition, the figures are generally arranged in rows, one 
row being above another. Such an arrangement is indicated 
by simply stating the number of the figures in each row : as, 
'* six crosses crosslets, three, two, and one,*' to denote three in the 
uppermost row, then two below them, and then one crosslet in 
base. When any single Charge is blazoned between three others, 
as a f esse hettoeen three torteaux, two of the torteaux are placed in 
chief and one in base ; and this same arrangement is observed, 
should the same Charge appear three times without any other 
device. If a single Charge is placed between six others, then 
three are in chief and three in base. A single Charge occupies a 
central position. Any deviation from these dispositions must be 
specified. 

In heraldic descriptions, the presence and the x&gt;os]tion of 
the stops or points demand especial attention. A comma pre- 
cedes and follows each item of every descriptive clause, and the 
consistent intervention of the more important points must be 
observed with rigid precision. Every abbreviation must be 
marked by a full stop; thus, org, is the abbreviated form of 



LANQUAOB, AND LAWS. 11 

argeni. This abbreviation-poiiit is not to supersede or interfere 
with the comma or other point, which may be required to 
follow any word whether abbreviated or expressed in full; 
thus, arg.^ on a ekeo, gu. three lianceU «a., is correct pointing. 
It appears desirable always to print all heraldic blazon in Italic 
type, and all proper names in small capitals : also, it is always 
right to print, three lton&gt; jambs^ three palmer'9 staves, dc, and 
not three lions' jambs, three palmers' staves, dc. The student will 
bear in mind that in Heraldry, while nothing is specified that 
can be distinctly and certainly understood without description, 
so nothing whatever is left to the possibility of contingency or 
misapprehension. 

It is a positive rule in Heraldry, that Metal shaU not appear 
upon Metaly nor Colour upon CkHowr ; that is, a Charge of one 
of the Metals must rest ux&gt;on, or be in contact with a surface 
or another charge of one of the Colours ; and in like manner, a 
charge of one of the Colours must rest upon, or be in contact 
with a surface or object of one of the Metals. This rule, 
absolute in its primary application, admits of a partial relaza^ 
tion in the case of varied surfaces, and of certain details of 
charges ; and also in those compositions, in which a supported 
device or figure extends in the shield beyond the charge that 
supports it. The solitary early violation of this heraldic law is 
the armorial ensign of the Crusader Ejngs of Jerusalem, who 
bore five golden crosses upon a silver shield, that thus their 
Arms might be distinguished from those of every other poten- 
tate ; No. 1, p. 8. The early form of the Jerusalem Cross is 
represented in Shield B; and the more recent and generally 
accepted form in Shield A. 

When any Charge is repealed in such considerable numbers, in 
the same composition, as to produce almost the appearance of a 
pattern, the Field so covered is said to be SemSe with the 
Charge in question. It will be observed that a Field which is 
Semee is often treated as if it were cut to the required size and 



12 HERALDIC BLAZON AND NOMENCLATURE* 

shape from a larger extent of surfEioe, some of the Charges being 
only partially represented. The ancient shield of France, nobly 
emblazoned in the North Choir- Aisle of Westminster Abbey, in 
the work either of Henry III., or of his son Edward L, bears 
axure, aemee de ly» or; No. 2, p. 12. 

When the often-repeated figure is of very small size, the term 
Powdered or Poudr^e is substituted for Semie. 

In Heraldry, every Coat or Shield of Arms, Crest and Badge 
is attached to the Name, and not to the Title, of the person who 
may bear them. 

All figures and devices represented in heraldic compositions 
have various attributes, qualities, and epithets assigned to them 
by Heralds, which express their several x&gt;ositions and disposi- 
tions, and indicate the parts which they take in the aggroupment 
of the whole. Thus the sun is said to be in iU glory, or eclipsed ; 
the moon is said to be increscent, or decrescent; human figures are 
variously habited ; animals are said to be armed with the horns, 
or the appendages provided for them by nature for their defence 
or for aggressive purposes. Similar appropriate terms indicate 
the circumstances under which figures and objects of all kinds 
appear in heraldic compositions, together with their individual 
peculiarities, details, and accessories. These terms are classified 
and explained in Chapters TX., X., XI., XII., and XIII. 




No. 2.— Fbance AnciKST. 




No. 3. No. 4. No. 5. 

HenJdio Shields. 



No. 6. 



CHAPTER IIL 



THE SHIELD, AND ITS PARTS, POINTS, AND PRIMARY DIVISIONS; AND 
DIYIDINO AND BORDER UNES. 

The Shield, the most important piece of their defensive armour, 
was derived by the knights of the middle ages from remote 
antiqnity, and at almost all times it has been decorated with 
some device or figure. The ancient Greek tragedian, .^Ischylus 
(abont B.C. 600), describes with minute exactness the devices 
that were borne by six of the seven chiefs who, before the 
Trojan War, besieged Thebes. The seventh shield is specially 
noted to have been uncharged. In the middle ages, in Europe, 
there prevailed a precisely similar usage; and, indeed, so uni- 
versal was the practice of placing heraldic insignia upon shields, 
that the shield has been retained in modem Heraldry as being 
inseparable from all Heraldry, so that it still continues to be 
the figure upon which the heraldic insignia of our own times 
are habitually chaiged. 

Early heraldic Shields vary very considerably in their forms, 
the simplest and most efiective forms having the contour of an 



14 THE SHIELD, AND ITS PARTS. 

inyerted equilateral aroh, slightly stilted, as No. 3, or No. 7, in 
Plate I. The shields actoallj nsed by the Normans in England 
were long and tapering ; they are exemplified in the equipment 
of the knightly effigies in the Temple Church, London. To 
these succeeded short, almost triangular, heater-shaped shields. 
Examples abound in the monumental effigies of the thirteenth 
and the fourteenth centuries. The equilateral form became 
prevalent early in the fourteenth century, at which period 
several modifications of the prevailing form were introduced. 
Two of the more effective of these varieties, Nos. 4 and 5, are 
severally drawn from the Percy Monument at Beverley, a.d. 
1350, and the Monument of John of Eltham, in Westminster 
Abbey, a.d. 1336. In the next century the shields were 
shortened, and as it advanced their form was altogether 
changed, and l9ecame somewhat square, the outlines being pro- 
duced by a series of concave curves : No. 6a. Shields of this 
class appear to have been introduced during the second half of 
the fourteenth century, but they did not become general until 
a later period. In these shields a curved notch is cut out, for 
the lance to pass through, in the dexter chief; when thus 
pierced, the shield was said to be a houehe ; No. 6. This form 
of shield may be advantageously used in Modem Heraldry, 
particularly when any composition has many charges, or when 
there are quarterings ; it would seem, however, to be desimble 
not to represent any shield as h houcke in modem Heraldry, 
since shields now do not require any adjustment to knightly 
lances laid in rest. And there is some danger lest a misappre- 
hension should arise with reference to the shield a houche, now 
that its use has so long passed away : thus, in each of the upper 
spandrels of the fine tmssed timber roof of Lincoln's Inn Hall 
there is carved a shield a bouche ; and these shields have been 
made to correspond with one another, as they range along the 
two opposite sides of the Hall, so that on one side the shields 
have the notches cut out, quite conectly, in their dexter 



THE SHIELD, JlND ITS PARTS. 



15 



chief, and the other series have their notches cnt in their 
sinister chief. 

Several veiy effeotive forms of late shields are sculptured 
upon the monument to Abhot Bambtdoe, in St. Alban's Abbey, 
which may be studied with advantage by modem Heralds, to- 
gether with the simple pointed shields of earlier times ; No. 6 a. 




No. 6 A. 

The form of the Shield, as a matter of course, may be deter- 
mined in Modem Heraldry in accordance with the preference of 
every Herald. All that I would suggest is, that the preference 
may as well rest upon the more agreeable rather than the less 
attractive forms. 

In early architectural and monumental compositions, and 
also often upon seals, heraldic shields are represented as if 
suspended from the guigey or shield-belt, which was actually 
worn by the knights to sustain and to secure their shields 
to their persons. In some instances of this always effective 
because always consistent and appropriate arrangement, the 
long ffuige appears on either side of the shield, and is there 
passed over a corbeL; as in No. 7, Plate I., one of the beautiful 
series of shields, in the choir-aisles of Westminster Abbey, 
which is charged with the arms of Raymond, Count of Pro- 
vence, — or, 4 pdlleU gtdes. The more prevalent usage was to 
represent the shield as being suspended from a single corbel, 
boss, or a cluster of foliage, or from some architectural member 
of the composition, as No. 135, Plate I. ; occasionally, and more 
particularly on seals, the shield appears as if suspended by the 



16 THE SHIELD, AND ITS PARTS. 

sinister ohief angle, and so hangs dii^onally from the helm and 
orest, as No. 301, Plate I., also No. 629, Plate LXYI. : a shield 
thns suspended is said to be eoiksM. These modes of arrange- 
ment, with the Tarions modifications of them that will readily 
suggest themselves, are worthy of the most thoughtful attention 
of the practical modem Herald. 

The Heraldic Shield is sometimes entitled an Escutcheon : and 
when one shield is charged upon another, the shield thus placed 
is distinguished as an Inescutckeon^ and is said to be borne in 
pretence. 

The different parts of an henddio shield are distinguished and 
entitled as follows : — ^No. 8. 

A. Dexter Siie. B. ainiOer Side. 

C. Chief, D. Base, 

E. Dexter Chief, F. Sinister Chief 

G. Middle Chief H. Desder Base. 

I. Sinister Base, E. MidMe Base. 

L. Honor Point, M. Fesse Point, 

Heraldic shields are divided in the manner indicated by 
examples, Nos. 9 to 14. 

No. 9, is Per Pale, or Impaled, No. 10, is Per Fesse, 

No. 11, is Per Cross, or Quarterly, No. 12, is Per Bend, 

No. 13, is Per Saltire, and No. 14, is Per Chevron, 

When a Shield is divided into more than four parts by lines 
drawn in pale and in fesse, crossing each other at right angles, 
it is said to be Quarterly of the number of divisions, whatever 
that number may be : thus. No. 15 is Quarterly of eight. 

In the instance of a Quartered Shield having one or more of 
its Quarters quartered, this compound division is indicated by 
the term Quarterly-quartered ; and the four primaiy Quarters are 
distinguished as Orand Quarters; thus in No. 16, A, B, C, D are 
the Orand Quarters, of which the first and the fourth, A and D, 
are Quarterly-quartered. 



SHIEIrDS OF ARMS &amp; ACHIEVEMENT OF ARMS. 



PROVE no: 




''A'es* i.-i. n.^^e.r Abbry, about ,^h"0 
CASTIliK «r LKON 




HARSYCK 




V/c.srn::r&gt;-^«r AbhP7Ar:290 Scutnacr^O.uirr. NVio:kAr 1384 



THE SHIELD, AND ITS PARTS. 



17 



The Heraldic Shield is always considered to bear its charge 
upon its &amp;ce, or external surface, and consequently the Dexter 
and the Sinuier sides of the shield itself are those, which 
would severally cover the right or the left side of a warrior 
when holding the shield in front of his person. The Dexter 
Bide of an heraldic composition or object, therefore, is oppotite 
to the 2^ hand of an observer, and the Sinister to his right 
hand. This nse of the terms Dexter and Sinister is invariable in 
Heraldry. 

The heraldic shield is .sometimes represented as howed^ or as 
if having a slightly convex contoar ; and shields of the form of 
No. 6 often have a ridge dividing them in pale. 

The enUre mirface of a Shield is called the Fidd, The same 
term Fidd is also applied to the entire snr&amp;ce of any Charge or 
Object 

The same terms that denote the parts and points of a Shield, 

are also applicable to a Flag^ or to any figure that may be 

charged with an heraldic composition. In Flags, the depth 

from chief to base is entitled the '* Hoist*' and the length from 

the point of suspension to the fore extremity is distinguished 

as the " i^y," which latter term also denotes the fore extremity 

of any Flag. 

Na 8. No. 15. No. 16. 

C. 




18 



THE SHIELD, AND ITS PARTS. 



Dividing and Border Lines, in addition to simple right 
lines and curves, assnme the forms indicated in Example, 
No. 17. 



A. Engrailed . . 

B. Invected . . . 

C. Wavy, or Undee 



D. NdndSe . 

E. Indented. 

F. Bancetle . 

G. EmbatUed 

H. Bagvlee . 
I. Dovetail . 







No. 17. 



The Ordinaries and other charges are constantly formed 
with these lines : as a Bordure may be indented, a Chief 
nehuUe, a Fesse dancette or embattledj a Cross engrailed, &amp;c., &amp;c. 
See Nos. 92, 94, 114, 115, 300 a, 319 b, 39r&gt;, 410, 433 and 
477. 



20 







TINCTURES. 








FURS. 




1. 


Ermine, 


Black spots on a wliite field. 


No. 25. 


2. 


Ermines. 


White spots on a black field. 


„ 26. 


3. 


Erminois, 


Black spots on a gold field. 


„ 27. 


4. 


Pean. 


Gold spots on a black field. 




5. 


Vair. 


Nos. 


28 and 29. 


6. 


Counter Vair, 


No. 30. 


7. 


Potent. 




„ 31. 



8. Counter Potent. „ 32. 

The Metals may bo expressed by gold and silver, or by 
yellow and white. 

The representation of the Tinctures by means of dots and 
lines was not in use amongst Heralds before the time of the 
accession of the Stuarts to tho English Crown. 

The student will observe that the metals always take pre- 
cedence of the colours, unless a contrary arrangement be specified. 
Also, that Fair, Counter Fair, Potent and Counter Potent are 
always Argent and Azure^ unless other tinctures are named in 
the blazon. See Chap. XXX. 

Objects and Figures represented in heraldic composition in 
their natural colours, are said to be jproper , abbreviated ppr, 

THB FURS. 



^ 



No. 25. 



WMWJ'TJ 



I + + A I 
■ i.l.i 



No. 26. 





No. 27. 



No. 28. 




No. 29. 



No. 30, 



No. 31. 




No. 40 a.— DE CUBE. 



CHAPTER V. 



THE OBOINARIBS AND THEIR DIMINUTIVES, AND THE 
ROUNDLES. 

The earlist devices of Medieval Heraldry are simple figures, 
entitled Ordinaries, whioli have been held by all Heralds in 
high esteem and honour, and retain their old rank in the 
Heraldry of the present day. They still sometimes appear, as of 
old, alone, or almost alone ; while in many instances the Ordina- 
ries are associated with other devipes, or are themselves charged 
with various figures. In their simplest condition, the Ordi- 
naries are formed by right lines ; but they also admit, instead of 
right lines, the various border lines of Example, No. 17. 

The Heraldic Ordinaries are nine in number, and are severally 
entitled, the Chief, No. 33 ; the Fesse, No. 34 ; the Bar, No. 35 ; 
the Pale, No. 36 ; the Crass, No. 37 ; the Bend, No. 38 ; the 
SaUire, No. 39 ; the Chevron, No. 40 ; and the PUe, No. 41. See 
Platen. 

Severed of these Ordinaries' have Diminuiives, which are 
grouped with them in the following descriptions of the Ordi- 
naries themselves. 



22 THE ORDINARIKS AND THEIR DIMtNUTIVES. 

I. The Chief, No. 33, formed by an horizontal line, contains 
in depth the uppermost third part of the field or area of the 
shield. It may be borne in the same composition with any 
other Ordinary, except the Feaae, 

The Diminutive of the Chief is the Fillet, the contents of which 
must not exceed one-fourth of the Chief, of which it always 
occupies the lowest portion. 

II. The Fesse, No. 34, which is identical in form and in area 
with the Chief, differs from that Ordinary only in its position 
in the field of the shield, of which it always occupies the 
horizontal central third part. 

The Fesse has no Diminutive, but it may be surmounted by 
a Pale or a Bend. 

III. The Bar, No. 36, differs from the I'esse in its width 
being one-fifth^ instead of one-third of the field. The Bar may 
be placed horizontally in any part of the field, except absolutely 
in chief or in base. Two Bars frequently appear in the same 
composition, in which case it is the usual practice to divide the 
field horizontally into five equal parts, and to assign to the Bars 
the two spaces that are on either side of the central space, as in 
No. 42. A Single Bar never appears in an heraldic composition 
without some other Ordinary. 

The Bar has two Diminutives, the Closet, and the Barrulet, 
which are respectively one-half, and one-fourth of the width of 
the Bar itself. 

When either of these Diminutives is placed on each side 
of a Fesse or Bar, the Ordinary is said to be cotised^ as 
No. 43. 

When Barrulets are placed together t» couples, as in No. 44, 
each couple is entitled a pair of Bars OemeUes, 

IV. Like the Chief and the Fesse, the Pale, No. 36, occupies 
one4hird of the field ; but its position is vertical instead of hori- 
zontal, and it accordingly appears in an erect position always in 
the centre of the field. The Pale is an Ordinary of compara- 



ORDINARIES 

HA^'iEF.- v: .vv::: 



ROUNDI/ES. 







#®0 






#^# 













® Q 






o # 





3 '♦^■&gt;sj&gt;^ 3b 5 



THE ORDINARIBS AND THEIR DIMINUTIVES. 23 

tively rare occurrence. It has two DiminuikeSj the PaUei, and 
the Endorse^ which are seyerally one-half and one-fowrih of its 
width. 

A Pak between two Endorses is said to be endorsed. No. 
45. 

A PdUet may appear in any vertical position in the shield. 
See No. 7, Plate I. 

V. In its simplest form, the heraldic Gross, No. 37, is pro- 
duced bj the meeting of two vertical with two horizontal lines, 
about the Fesse point. No. 8, M, of the Shield ; or it may be 
defined to be the combination of a Fesse with a Pale. When 
charged, the Gross occupies about on&amp;4h%rd of the field ; but 
otherwise it occupies only one-fif&amp;i of the field. So numerous 
are the modifications of form, decoration, and arrangement 
which Heralds have introduced into this Ordinary, that I 
propose to devote a separate chapter to the '* Heraldry of the 
Cross." 

YI. The Bend, No. 38, is formed by two paraUeL lines drawn 
diagonally, at equal distances Jrom the Fesse^point, from the Dexter 
Chief to ihe Sinister Base. When charged, the Ordinary con- 
tains one-^trd, but when plain it contains one-fifth part of the 
field. Two uncharged Bends may appear in the same Gom- 
poBition« The Bend also is associated with other Ordinaries, 
or it may be placed over other Gharges. Gharges set on a 
Bend are placed Bendwise: that is, ihey slope wi^ the Bend. 
No. 46. 

The Diminutives of the Bend are the Bendlet, containing 
one-half of the Bend, and the Ootise, containing one-half of the 
Bendlet. 

A Bend placed hetween two Cotises, is said to be cotised. 
No. 47. 

A Biband is a Gotise eouped (cut off smooth) at its extremi- 
ties, 80 that it does not extend to the edges of the Shield. 
No. 48. 



24 THE ORDINIRIBS AND THEUi DIMINUTIVES. 

A Bend, when tMtitn^ from the Siniiter instead of the Dexter 
Chief, is distinguished as a Bend Siniiter. 

VII. The Saltire, No. 39, or Diagonal OrosBj is a combination 
of a Bend with a Bend Sinister. It contains one-fifih of the 
field, but one4hird when it is charged. 

The Saltire may appear in the same Composition with the 
Chief. It has no Diminutive. Charges set on a Saltire slope 
with each of its limbs. No. 49. 

Vni. The Chevron, No. 40, which comprises somewhat 
more than the lower half of a charged Saltire, occupies one-fifth 
of the field. 

Two Chevrons may appear in the same Composition, or a 
single Chevron may be blazoned with a Chief. Charges set on 
a Chevron slope in the same manner as those that are charged 
upon a Saltire. No. 49. 

The Diminutive of this Ordinary is the Chevrond, which con • 
tains one-half of a Chevron. The De Clares bore, Or, three 
ekevronds, gules. No. 40 a, (p. 21). 

IX. The Pile, No. 41, a wedge in form, generally issues 
from the Middle Chief and extends towards the Middle Base, 
of a shield. Occasionally, however, this Ordinaiy is borne in 
the same direction as the Bend ; or it may issue from various 
parts of the enclosing line of a shield. 

In early shields the Fesse, Pale, Cross, Bend, Saltire and 
Chevron are generally very narrow, as Nos. 33 a, and 33 b. 

Charges are often placed and arranged after the form of the 
Ordinaries : thus, charges may be in Chief, No. 49 a ; in Fesse, 
No. 49 B ; t» Pale, No. 49 c ; in Cross, No. 49 d ; in Bend, 
No. 49 B ; in Saltire, No. 49 f ; in Chevron, No. 49 o ; and in 
Pilej No. 49 h. 

With the Ordinaries may be associated another group, of 
the simplest character and in general use. These figures are 
the Seven Roundles, each of which possesses its own diHtinctive 
title. Plate II. 



THE ROaNDLES. 



25 



They are : — 

1. The Bez(nU,—or. No. 50. 

2. The Plate,— argent. No. 51. 

3. The Ewte^-^asBwre, No. 52. 

4. The Torteaa.-'gutea. No. 53. 

5. The PeOet^—Mble. No. 54. 

6. The Pomme, — veH. No. 55. 

7. The Fountain. No. 56» 

which last is divided horizontally by wavy lines, and is alter- 
nately argent and assure. 

In representation, the Bezant^ Plate^ and Fauniainy are flaty but 
the other Bonndles are to appear spherical, and to be shaded 
accordingly. 

A Bonndle of one of the Furs, or tinctured in any other man- 
ner, or if charged, must haye its distinctive character specified 
in the blazon. In early blazon all the Roundles have their 
tinctures specified ; and it woidd seem to be desirable to resume 
this early habit, except in the instances of the Bezant and the 
Plate. 





No. 33 a. No. 33 b. 

DE NEVILLE. DE LACT. 

(Roll of Arms, temp. Edw. I.) (Counter Seal, aj&gt;. 1235.) 



mm 



No. 63. 
First Union Jack. 




No. 64. 
Second Union Jack. 



CHAPTER VI. 



THE HERALDRY OF THE CROSS. 

The Cross, as an heraldio symbol, has already been defined 
to be a oombination of two others of the Ordinaries of Heraldry, 
the Fesse and the Pale, When it is not repeated in the same 
Composition, and when the contrary is not set forth in the 
blazon, the simple Cross is placed erect in the centre of the 
Shield, and it extends to the limits of the field. Hany Crosses, 
howeyer, may be introduced into the same composition: or a 
single Cross may be placed within a Bordure: or it may be 
interposed between other Charges npon the Shield : or it may 
itself be charged : or it may appear under a variety of conditions 
affecting both its form and its position. 

The Oreek Cross, No. 57, has its four limbs all of equal 
length. Plate III. 

The LaHn Gross, No. 58, has its uppermost limb and its 
transverse limbs of the same length, the fourth limb or shaft 
being considerably longer than the other three. In some cases 
the uppermost limb of a Latin Cross is either longer or shorter 
than the two transverse ones. 

The Cross without any upper limb. No. 59, is entitled the 



HERAI/DRY OF THE CKOSS. 



'-r A- T^t: 










If 




^m 



THE HERALDRY OF THE CROSS. 27 

Gross of S. Anthony y or the Tau Oross^ from its form being the 
same as the Greek Character Tom (T). 

A diagonal Cross is entitled a Saltire. The Crosses of St. 
Andrew of Scotlaot), No. 60, and of St. Patrick of Ireland, 
No. 61, are Crosses-Saltires, the former being Argent, on a field 
Azure^ and the latter Otdes^ on afield Argent. 

The Cross of St. Oboroe of England, No. 62, is QvleSj upon a 
fidd Argent. 

The Combination of the Crosses of St. Gborob and St. 
Andrew produced the First Union Jack, No. 63, which was 
declared in 1606, by King James I., to constitute the National 
Ensign of Oreat Britain, It happily symbolises the Union 
of England and Scotland, in the union of the Crosses of the 
two realms. 

In 1801, in consequence of the legislative Union with Ire- 
land, a Second Union Ensign superseded its predecessor. 
The new compound device was required to comprehend the 
three Crosses of St. George, St. Andrew, and St. Patrick in 
combination. It appears, charged upon a banner, in No. 64, 
and is well known to every Englishman as the blazonry dis- 
played upon that '* Meteor Flag of England," of which the poet 
wrote in words of fire. The blazonry of this, the Second Union 
Jack, is borne by the Duke of Welungton, charged upon a 
Shield of Pretence over his paternal arms. It is an ''Aug- 
mentation of Honor," significant and expressive, granted to 
the Duke. The Duke of Marlborough bears, in like manner, 
the Cross of St. George upon a Canton. See Chap. XXXI. 
The Union Device is displayed, as a national ensign, in Flags 
only,-— except in the copper coinage of the realm, which exhibits 
a seated Britannia, with a shield always incorrecUy blazoned 
with this Union Device. This inaccuracy is in the diagonal 
crosses, which are made to assume the appearance of a single 
diagonal Cross having a narrow fimbriation — a narrow border, 
that is, of equal width on either side of it. 



28 THE HERALDRY OF THE CROSS. 

It will be observed that in both the Union Devices, Nob. 
63 and 64, the Cross of St Oeoi^e appears with a narrow white 
border, which is entitled a Fimbriaiicn, Also, that in the 
Second Union, the Gross-Saltire of St. Patrick has its four 
limbs fimbriated on one side. 

No. 65 is an example of a fimbriated Cross. It will be ob- 
served tliat the Fimbriation lies in the same plane with the 
Cross, to which it forms a border. Hence there is no shading 
hettoeen the Fimbriation and the Cross, but the Fimbriation 
itself is duly shaded. In case one Cross should be placed upon 
another, the primary or lower Cross would display a broader 
border than the Fimbriation ; and it is also indicated, by shading 
hoih the Crosses^ that one Cross is surmounted by another. The 
student will compare Nos. 65 and 66. 

When the central area of a Cross is entirely removed, so that 
of the Ordinary itself little more remains than the outlines, 
such a Cross is said to be voided, as No. 66 a. 

No. 67 is h pointed Cross. 

A Cross crossed at the head, as No. 68, is a Patriarchal 
Cross; and when placed upon steps, as No. 69, a Cross is 
said to be on Degrees. 

When the extremities of a Cross do not extend to the Chief, 
Base, and Sides of a Shield, it is said to be couped, or humetiee, 
as No. 70. 

The dross of eight PointSy distinctively so called, and known 
also as a Maltese Cross, is represented in No. 71. This Cross 
was borne by the Knights Templars, ChdeSy upon a field 
Argent. By the Hospitallers, or Knights of St. John, the 
same Cross was borne Argent^ upon a field Sable. The student 
of Mediaeval History will remember that between the years 
1278 and 1289» when engaged in military duties, the Knights 
HospitallerB bore a while Cross, straight, upon a red field. 

A Cross which expands into a square at the centre, as in 
No. 72, is a Cross Quadrate. When a squaie aperture is pierced 



THE HERALDRY OF THE CROSS. 29 

through its centre, as in No. 73, a Gross is qnarter pierced. 
The term quarterly pierced, denotes the entire remoyal of the 
central portion of the Cross, the four limhs only being left in 
contact, as in No. 74 : see also the arms of the Earl of 

WiNTERTON. 

The beautiful varieties of the Heraldic Cross which follow 
are generally borne in small groups ; occasionally, however, a 
single figure of any one of these Crosses may be seen alone. 

No. 75 is the Cross Mdine: and No. 76 is the Cross Be- 
eerceUe, 

The Cross Patonce, No. 77, perhaps the most beautiful of the 
Heraldic Crosses, expands more widely than the Moline, and 
has its eidxemities floriated. It appears in the arms assigned 
to Edward the Confessor, No. 78, Plate I. ; and it was 
borne by Wm. de Vesci, a.d. 1220, and by Wm. de Fortibus, 
about 1250. 

The Cross Fleurie, No. 79, has its four limbs straight, instead 
of expanding like the P&amp;tcmce; and the Cross FleureUSe, No. 
80, which may be regarded as a modification of the Cross 
Fleurie (though by some Heralds these two Crosses are con- 
sidered to be identical), is a plain Gross, couped, and having a 
Fleur-de-lys issuing from each extremity. 

Examples of Crosses having floriated terminations, occur in 
BoUs of Arms of Henry III. and Edward I. 

No. 81 is the Cross Pomm^e ; No. 82 is the Cross FourtMe ; 
and No. 82 a is the Cross UrdSe, p. 30. 

A Gross crossed towards the extremity of each limb, as No. 83, 
is a Gross Oroaslet, and is an equally favourite and beautiful 
Charge. When the Field is covered with small Crosses Crosslets, 
it is said to be CrueQly, or CrueiUe, 

When the Shaft of any Cross is painted at the &amp;a«e, it is said 
to be Fitchie, '* fixable," that is, in the ground. 

The Cross Orosdet Fitchee is shown in No. 84. 

The Crosses Pai^e or Formic, and Patie or FormSe FUckie, 



30 THE HERALDRY OF THE CROSS. 

are shown in Nos. 85 and 86. These Crosses may be drawn 
either with right lines, or with their radiating lines slightly 
curved. 

The Grosses Botonie or T^eflSe, and Botonee or TreflSe Fitehee^ 
Nos. 87, 88, and 388 e, PI. XLVIIL, are modifications of the 
Grosslet. 

The Cross Patent, No. 89, resembles the Fur which bears the 
same name, No. 31. Nos. 90 and 91 seyerally represent the 
Crosses Potent FUchSe, and Potent Qtuidrate. 

A Cross may be formed of any of the Border Lines ; thus, 
Nos. 92, 93 and 94 are respectively Crosses Engrailed, Waoy or 
UndSe, and BagtiUe, 

When any Charges are placed upon a Shield in a cruciform 
order of arrangement, they are said to be in Cross; thus, No. 95 is 
Argent, five Fusils in cross, gules. 




No. 82 A.-CroB8 Urd^. 



SUBORDINARIES ^VARIED FIEI/DS. 






No. 99. No. 99 a. 

DE MOBTmSB. 



CHAPTER VII. 



SUB0BDINARIE8. 



The term Subordinart is applied to a group of devioes, less 
simple, and also less important than the Ordinaries, but which 
still admit of a certain general classification. They are fourteen 
in number. Plate IV. 

1. The Canton, No. 96, is a square, situated in the dexter 
chief of the shield, and it occupies about one-ninth part of the 
entire field. This Subordinaiy in early shields was of larger 
size, and it appears to have superseded the Quarter^ now not in 
use. 

2. The Otron, No. 97, is half of the first quarter of the 
shield, that quarter being divided diagonally by a line drawn 
from the dexter chief. 

3. The Inescutcheon, or Shield of Pretence, No. 98, is 
a small shield pretended upon the face of the shield. An In- 
escutcheon of silver, or sometimes of ermine, was borne by the 
Mortimers: Nos. 99 and 99a, and Nos. 269, 270; also Nos. 
388 F, and 388 o, PL XXVII. See PI. XXIV. 

4. The Orle, Nos. 100 and 376, may be described as the 



32 SUBORDINARIES. 

narrow border of a Bhield charged upon the field of a larger 
shield. Sometimes a series of separate charges form an Orle ; 
that is, when they are so arranged that they form a kind of 
border to the shield. In this case, such charges are said to be 
In OrUy or they may be blazoned as an Orle. Thns, the Dx 
Valences bore Barruly org. and az^ an orle of marUeU gu.; 
No. 101, Plate V. ; Plates VIL, and XXXVIII. : also Plates 
XXVII. and XLVIII. 

6. The Tressure, No. 102, is a double Orle enriched with 
Flenrs de lys: it is blazoned in the Boyal Shield, No. 103, PL 
v., and in several of the baronial shields of Sootland. The 
Tressure first appears in the Shield of Alexander III., a.d. 
1249-1287. See also Plates LIL, LVIII., LIX. Impalement 
generally dimidiates the Tressure, as in No. 345, PI. XXII. ; bat 
in early examples this rule is occasionally superseded, as in 
No. 344, PL XXII., and No. 719, PL LIL 

6. The LozENOE, No. 104, is a four-sided figure, set diagonally 
upon the shield. See also No. 719, PL LII. 

7. The Fusil, Nos. 105, 405-7, is a narrow elongated 
Lozenge. 

8. The Frette, No. 106, is an interlacing figure, which may 
be said to be compounded of a narrow Saltire, and a Masde. 
It was borne by the Despencers, No. 107, and still appears 
in Arms of the Earl Spencer. When the interlacing bars of 
a Frette are repeated, so as to cover the field either of the 
Shield or of any Charge, such a field is said to be FreUie. This 
Frette-Work is supposed to be tn relief upon the field, and 
therefore in any representation of it it is to be shaded : Nos. 
106 A, PL IV., 435 A, and 436, PL L. 

9. Flanches, No. 108, and No. 662, and Flabques or Voibers, 
No. 108 A, are formed by two curved lines, and are always borne 
in pairs, one on either side of the field. 

10. The Mascle, Nos. 101, 441, PL XLIX., and 609, PL 
XLV., is a Lozenge voided. 



SHIEI/DS OF ARMS. 



DE VALENCE 



SCOTLAND 




CORN&gt;VALi-. 




LB DE 8PKNCER 



BRITTANY 








\ 



SUBORDIN ARIES. 33 

11. The RusTRE, No. 110, ia "a Loasenge, pierced with a 
circiilar opening in its centre. 

12. The Billet, No. Ill, is a rectangular oblong. A field 
semee of Billets is BiOetee; Nos. 410, 411, PI. XLVIII. 

13. The Label, No. 112, is a Eiband crossing the shield bar- 
wise, and having three, four, five, or sometimes a larger number 
of shorter ribands depending from it at regular intervals: see 
ZaW, in Chap. IX.: also Plates XXXI., XXXHI., XXXIV., 
XXXVI., XLIX., and No. 33 b, p. 25. 

14. The BoRDURE, No. 113, constitutes a border to the shield, 
and contains in breadth one-fifth part of the field. In Mediasval 
Heraldiy both the Label and the Bordnre were borne as Differ- 
ences. The Bordnre now is frequently borne as a Charge : it is 
always represented in relief upon the shield, and in the same 
plane with the Ordinaries. (See Bordered, in Chap. XIL) The 
Bordure is not affected by Qwirtering ; No. 364 a, PI. XXIIT., 
and No. 663, PI. LXII. ; but In^palemetU dimidiates the Bordure, 
as in Nos. 320, 321, PI. XVIIL, and Nos. 346, 346 a, PI. XXH. ; 
in some early examples, however, as No. 340, PI. XX., and 
Nos. 342, 343, PI. XXIL, an impaled Bordure is not dimidiated. 
The Bordnre may be plain, as in No. 113 ; or engrailed, or in- 
denied, as in Nos. 114, 115; or it may be charged with any 
device, as in No. 194, PI. V., the Arms of Richard, Earl of 
Cornwall, second son of King John, who died a.d. 1296. His 
shield — ca-g.^ within a bordure aa. hezarUee, a lion ram^, gu,y croumed 
or — remains in the choir-aisle series at Westminster : see Plates 
XVIIL, XIX., XXIL, XXIIL, XXXIL, XXXIX., LL, LXIL 
LXXIII. A curious early example of a Bordure bezant^e is 
preserved on the shield of an unknown knight, whose effigy yet 
remains at Whit worth: this shield. No. 115 a, p. 34, is carved 
in low relief. 

When a Canton and a Bordure are blazoned upon the same 
nhield, the Canton surmounts the Bordure ; as in No. 116, PI. V., 

D 



34 SUBORDINARIES. 

the Arms of John de Dreox, Count of Brittany, nephew of 
Edw. I., thus blazoned in the Caerlaverock Boll, — chequ^ or and 
az,j a hardure gu. semee of lions of England ; a camUm (or quarter) 
erm. See also Nos. 442, 453-6, Plates XL. and L. 




No. 115 A. Shield of Effigy at Whitworth. 




No. 121.--DE Gret. 



CHAPTER Vin. 

VARIED FIELDS AND DIAPERS. 

Both Shields and the Charges which they bear frequently 
have their surfaces varied in their tinctures, the devices or 
patterns thus adopted being derived from the Ordinaries and 
Subordinaries. 

It must be carefully observed, that in these Varied Fields 
all the parts lie in the same plane or level, and that they differ in 
this respect from fields which are charged or have devices set 
upon them. It follows that in Varied Fields no shading what- 
ever is introduced, nor is any relief indicated. 

1. A Field divided after the manner of a Oyron, is said to 
be Qyronny, This division generally comprises eight pieces, 
as in No. 117, PI. IV.; but, sometimes, as in No. 118, it has 
six only. 

2. A Field Lozengy, No. 119, PI. IV., is divided into Lozenge- 
shaped figures. 

3. In a Field FwiUy, No. 120, the divisions are narrower than 
in Lozengy. 

4. Barry is formed by dividing a Field into an even number of 
Bare. In blazoning, the number is specified; thus. No. 121, 
page 35, is — Barry of Six, arg» and az., borne by the Earl Dk 

d2 



36 VARIED FIELDS AND DIAPERS. 

Oret. When the bars are more than eight in nnmber, the term 
Bamdy may be used; as in No. 101, Plate VII. 

5. Paly is fonned by dividing the Field into an even number of 
Pales, the number to be specified ; thus, No. 121 a' is paly of 8. 
Compare No. 7, Plate I. 

6. Bendy is formed by dividing the Field into an even nwmber 
of Bends, in blazoning the number being specified; No. 121 b, 
PL IV. 

7. Barry Bendy, No. 122, is produced by lines drawn hori- 
zontally, hetr-wise, crossed by others drawn diagonally, or bend- 
wise. 

8. Paly Bendy, No. 123, is produced by lines drawn pale-wise, 
crossed by others drawn bend-wise. 

9. When the Field of any charge is divided into a series of 
small squares, if there is a single row only of such squares, that 
arrangement, exemplified in No. 124, is styled Company or 
Ct&gt;i»pofi^ ; accordingly , No. 124, PI. IV., is blazoned, — A Bor- 
dure componee, org, and az,, borne by the Duke of Beaufort : see 
Plates XXII. and XXXII. 

10. When there are two rows of squares, having the metal 
and colour alternating, it is Counter Componee, as in No. 125. 

11. Should the division exhibit more than two rows of alter- 
nate squares, as in No. 126, and in No. 623, PI. LII., it is Chequde 
or Cheeky. In all these instances the Tinctures must be specified 
in the blazon. 

12. A Field may also be divided simply after the manner 
indicated by the form and position of an Ordinary ; as Per Pale, 
&amp;o., as I have already shown in Chapter III. 

13. The term Counter-changing is employed to denote a reci- 
procal exchange of Metal for Colour, and Colour for Metal, either 
in the same Composition or the same Charge. This arrange- 
ment implies the presence of one Metal (or Fur), and one Colour, 
and that whatever is charged upon the Metal should be tinctured 
of the Colour, and that whatever is charged upon the Colour 



VARIED FIELDS AND DIAPERS. 37 

should be tinctured of the Metal. In one of the Rolls of Arms 
of Henrt m. a curious early example of Gounterchanging occurs 
in the Shield of Egbert de Ghandos, No. 127, — Or, a PUe guUs, 
charged vnJOi (hree Estoiles and between 9ix dhers, all ofikem counter- 
changed : Plate YI. 

14. Diaper is every system of decorative design that is intro- 
duced by Heralds to increase the vividness of any sur&amp;ce, 
whether the Field of a Shield or of any Charge. Diaper, accord- 
ingly, is an ornamental accessory only, and not a Charge. Great 
care, therefore, must always be taken in the introduction of 
Diapering, to keep the accessory in due subordination to the 
true heraldic design, that there may not arise even a suspicion 
of the Diaper taking a part in the blazon. 

This Diaper may be executed in any Tincture that is in 
keeping with heraldic rule, but it does not afifect in any degree 
the heraldic Tinctures of the composition. A very effective 
Diaper is produced by executing the decorative accessory in a 
different tint of the same tincture with the Field, or in black. 
Gold and Silver Diapers may be placed upon Fields of any of 
the Colours ; and all Diapers are applicable to every variety of 
Charge. 

In the Heraldry of the middle ages Diapering was in con- 
stant use, and the Heralds of those days have transmitted to us 
abundant evidence of their skill in its application. It appears 
to be most desirable to revive the general adoption of this beau- 
tiful system of ornamentation in all surfi^ses of any extent. 

In Heraldiy in Stained Glass it is always peculiarly desir- 
able to diaper the Field, and also all Ordinaries and other 
Charges of large size and simple form ; such also is the case in 
whatever Heraldry may be introduced into Illuminations. 
In Sculptured Heraldry, Diapers may be executed with excel- 
lent effect in slight relief 

From amongst almost innumerable fine examples of early 



38 VARIED FIELDS AND DIAPERS, 

heraldic Diaper, I must be content to specify those which may 
yet be traced upon the Monuments of Queen Eleanor of Castile, 
A.D. 1290 ; of WiuJAM DE Valence, Earl of Pembroke, a.d. 1206, 
No. 101, Plate Vn. ; and of Edmond, snmamed ** Crouchback," 
Earl of Lancaster, a.d. 1296 : also upon the Effigies of Kino 
Henry in., a.d. 1272 ; of Kino Richard I., and Anne of Bohemia, 
his Queen, a.d. 1394, all of them in Westminster Abbey : as also 
the Shields upon the Percy Shrine, about a.d. 1350, in Beverley 
Minster ; the Shield of Eobert de Vere, Earl of Oxford, a.d. 
1298, at Hatfield Broadoak, Essex, No. 158, Plate VI., (this 
Diaper, like those of Beverley, is in relief). The Field of the 
Brass to Abbot Thomas De la Mere, about a.d. 1375, in St. 
Alban's Abbey Church; and the entire Brass, a.d. 1347, to 
Sir Hugh Hastings, at Elsyng, in Norfolk. In Plate VI. two 
of the diapered Shields of the Percy Shrine are represented: 
No. 127 A is Percy — Or, a lion ramp, az, ; and No. 127 c is De 
Warrennb — CheqiUe or and az. No. 127 b is another Shield of 
De Warrenne, diapered in gold and colour, from the remains of 
Castle Acre Priory, Norfolk, about a.d. 1300. The examples of 
admirable Diaper that abound in early Seals, Illuminations, and 
Glass, almost defy selection. I give a single specimen in No. 510 : 
see also Chapter XXX. 




No. 510. — Diaper of the Seal of Thomas Flantagenet, K.G., Duke of 
Gloucester (enlarged). See Chap. XYII., Section 1. 



SHIEIrDS OP ARMS. 



ROBERT DE CHANDOS 



PERCY 













UE WARHENNE DE «VAHB£M«E. 




l.iTP .1 



MISCEI/IrANEOUS CHARGES. 

INANIMATE OBJECTS. 





No. 128.— Admiralty Flag. 



\ 



CHAPTER IX. 

MISCELLANEOUS GHABGES. 

PABT L — INANIMATE OBJECTS. 

With the view to place in the simplest manner before students 
of Heraldry the various objects and figures that are chained 
upon Heraldic Shields, I have arranged in Classified Oronps 
these different Chaises, only excluding such as are too simple, 
and too well known in their non-heraldic capacity, to require 
any specific notice when the Herald summons them to appear 
and act at his bidding. 

All Descriptive Terms I have placed in a separate group. 
So also all Heraldic Titles and Terms that are neither simply 
descriptive, nor the names of Charges, form a group by them- 
selves. In each Group the terms are placed and treated after 
the manner of an Heraldic Glossary. 

THE PBINOIPAL INANIMATE OBJECTS. 

Anchor : — appears as a Chaise in Heraldry. It is borne with 
a cable, set fesse-wise, all of gold, on a red Flag, by the British 
Admiralty; No. 128. 

Angenne : — a six-leaved flower, or six-foil ; No. 244, PI. XIII. 

Antwlet : — a ring, plain, and of any size ; No. 129, PI. VIII. ; 
No. 454, PL XL. ; and No. 440, PI. L. In Cadency, the Annulet 



40 MISCELLANEOUS GHABOES. 

ia the Difference of the Fifth Son ; No. 383, PL XII. The 
Annulet is sometimes blazoned as a False Boundle. 

Arrow: — this missile, when borne as a Charge, is blazoned 
as armed, and fecdhered or flighted. A bundle of arrows is 
entitled a Sheaf; No. 129 a, Plate YIII., from the monument 
of Arthub Tudor at Worcester. 

Axe : — see Hatchet. 

BaU : — a spherical Boundle. 

Banner : — ^bome by Sir. R. Bannerman ; No. 129 b, PL VIII. 

Bar : — one of the Ordinaries ; No. 35. 

Bamades : — see Breys. 

Barrvlet : — a diminutiye of the Bar. See Chap. Y. 

Baton: — a diminutive of the Bend Sinister, couped at its 
extremities : see Chap. V. 

Battering Bam : — ^bome by the Earl of Abingdon; No. 129 c, 

PL vm. 

Beacon : — an iron case containing some inflammable substance 
in active combustion, set on the top of a pole, against which a 
ladder is also placed ; No. 130. It wajs a badge of Henrt Y., 
and appears on his monument at Westminster: see Chap. 
XIX., Section lY. It is also a Badge of the Comptons : see 
Chap. XVn., Section 1. 

BeU : — ^bome by the namo Bell. This Shield is at Canterbury. 

Bend : — one of the Ordinaries ; No. 38. 

Bend Sinider .-—see Chap. V. 

Bendlet : — a diminutive of the Bend : see Chap. Y. 

Bezant : — a plain flat golden Disc, or Koundle, No. 60, sup- 
posed to be derived from the gold coins foimd by the Crusaders 
to have been current at Byzantium. 

Billet : — an oblong square of any Tincture ; No. Ill, PL lY. 

Bird-bdt : — an arrow with a blunt head. 

Book: — ^bome both open and closed; Nos. 600, 601, PL 
XLVIl. 

Bordure .—No. 1 13. See p. 33 ; also Chap. XV. 



MISCELLANEOUS CHABGES. 41 

BoUmief and BoUmie FUchSe : — a Cross, having its arms ter- 
minating in trefoils ; Nos. 87, 88, PI. m., and 388 e, PL XL Vm. 
SeeTreflie. 

Bourdon ;— a Palmer's Staflf ; No. 158 a, PL LXIX. 

Breys: — ^bamacles for a horse's nose, used in breaking the 
animal. This Charge appears on the shields of the brothers 
1)e Genetille, in the Eoll of Henbt III. ; also in the stained glass 
at Dorchester, Ac. ; No. 131, PL VHI., and No. 131 a, PL XIV. 

Brizwe : — a Difference or Mark of Cadency. 

Buckle : — the common instrument for jfostening, which is borne 
in Heraldry both separately and attached to straps, as in the arms 
of the Pelhams ; Nos. 132, PL VIII. and 132 a, PL XLIX., also 
No. 460. In the thirteenth century, Thomas Bocelane or Boceltk, 
bore, gu,, three buckles arg. ; No. 132 b, PL XLIX. 

Burgonet : — a variety of Helmet, worn principally in the six- 
teenth century. 

Caltrop^ or Oaltrap : — a ball of iron, from which four long and 
sharp spikes project in such a manner, that when the Caltrap 
lies on the ground, one spike is always erect. It was used in 
war to maim horses ; No. 133, PL VIII. 

CarOon :— No. 96, PL IV. 

Carbuncle, or Escarbunde: — ^in Heraldry, a figure formed by 
a rose, from which issue eight rays of sceptre-like foim and 
character; these rays are sometimes united both at their ex- 
tremities, and again midway between their extremities and the 
central rose. It appears upon the shield of Geoffrey de 
Mandeville, Earl of Essex, in the efifigy attributed to him in 
the Temple Church, the date being about a.d. 1160. This 
example, however, is earlier than the period in which any 
peculiar heraldic charges can be considered to have assumed 
definite and recognized forms. A device which in its general 
aspect resembles the Escarbunde constitutes the arms of Na- 
varre (it superseded the sUver cross upon blue about a.d. 1200), 
and it is charged upon the Royal Shield of Henry IV., by 



42 MISCELLANEOUS CHAKGES. 

impalement, as the ensign of Queen Joanna of Navabre ; Nos. 
134, 134 A, 323, 335 a, 348, Pis. Vin., XVm., and XXIH. See 
Navarre, in Chap. XXXTII. 

CasUe ;--a turretted and embattled military edifice, generally 
triple-towered. It is the well-known heraldic device of Castile, 
borne by Alianore, Queen of Edward I. ; No. 136, PL L, and 
No. 136 A, PI. VIII. 

Chamjron : — armour for a horse's head. 
Chaplet : — an entwined wreath : see Clarland. 
ChetB-rook: — one of the pieces used in the game of Chess; 
Nos. 136, 448, Plates VIII. and XL. Borne by the name Eokb- 
WOODE : borne also in the thirteenth century by Simon le Fitz- 
SiMON, gu,^ three ches^-rooha erm. ; No. 136 c, PI. LXIX. 

Chevron : — one of the Ordinaries ; No. 40. 

Ohevrond : — a diminutive of the Chevron ; No. 40 a. 

Chief: — one of the Ordinaries ; No. 33. 

Cinque'foU, or QuirUefoU : — a figure formed after the fashion of 
a five-leaved grass; No. 136 a, PI. VIII. ; see also PL XVI. 

Civic Crown : — a wreath of oak leaves and acorns. 

Clarion : — ^this charge is also called a Best, and occasionally a 
SuffltMy or a Claricord or Clamcord. It most probably is the 
heraldic representation of the ancient musical instrument called 
a "Clarion," possibly a species of "Pandean Pipe." It was 
borne in the arms of Neath Abbey, and was apparently a Bebus- 
Badge of the De Glares. It is now borne for the name Gran- 
ville ; Nos. 136 B, and 137, PL VIH. 

Closet : — a diminutive of the Bar : see Chap. V. 

Comb : — ^bome for the name Ponsonby. 

Cotise, or Couste : — a diminutive of the Bend : see Chap. V. 

Couple-Close : — half a Chevronel : see Chap. V. 

Crampette: — ^the ornament at the end of a sword-scabbard. 

Crancdin : — See Saxony^ in Chap. XXXII. 

Cross : — one of the Ordinaries. See Chap. VI. 

Crotier : — see p€tstorcd Staff. 



MISGEUiANfiOUS CHABaES. 43 

Orasi-Crosslet :— No. 83, PL III. 

Cup, or Covered Cup ;— No. 137 a, PL VIII., from the Slab of 
John le Botiler, about a.d. 1300; and the Brass to Judge 
Marttn, A.D. 1436, Graveney, Kent 

Cushion^ or PiUow (OreiUer) : — ^usually of a square form, with 
a tassel at eaoh comer, borne by the Eirkpatbigks ; No. 138. 
The Cushions represented beneath the heads of mediadval effigies 
are often richly diapered, and it is common for the upper of two 
cushions to be set lozengewise upon the lower ; as in No. 138 a, 
PL XY., from the Be Bohun Brass, Westminster. 

Dagger: — a short sword, called a *' Misericorde," and in 
military monumental effigies worn on the right side. 

Dancette, or Dafwe:— sometimes used by early Heralds to 
denote a Fesse Dancdte, It occurs in this acceptation in the 
Boll of Caerlaverock. 

Degrees : — steps. 

Endorse : — ^a diminutive of the Pale : see Chap. V. 

Eetoile : — a star, having six, or sometimes eight, or more wavy 
points or rays ; No. 140. See MvUet, 

Fake Cross^ FaUe EsaUcheon, FaUe Baundle :— a Cross voided, 
an Orle and an Anmdd. 

Fan : — a winnowing implement used in husbandry ; No. 141, 
PL Yin. It appears charged upon the Shield, the Surcoat and 
the Ailettes of Sir B. De Sevans, in his Brass at Chartham, 
Kent, about a.d. 1305 ; also upon a Shield in the Cloisters at 
Canterbury. 

Fer-de-Moline : — see MiU-rind. 

FermaUe, plural Fermaux : — a buckle. 

Ferr : — a horse-shoe. 

Fesse .-—one of the Ordinaries ; No. 34, PL U. 

FeUerloek :-^B, shackle and padlock; No. 142, PL YIIL It 
was the Badge of Edmond Plantagenet, of Langley, fifth son 
of Edward III. ; and of his great-grandson, Edward IY. It 
appears, charged on a shield, in the Brass of Sir SyMon de Fel- 



44 MISCELLANEOUS CHARGES. 

BRiGGE, K.G., Banner-bearer to Richard II., a.d. 1416, at Felbrig, 
in Norfolk ; also, it forms a diaper in the stained glass of the 
north window of the great transept at Canterbniy. 

FUe : — a Label, apparently from^um, a narrow ribjmd. 
FiUet : — a diminutiye of a Chief: see Chap. V. 
Flagon : — ^bome by De Montbourchibr, No. 464, PI. LI. 
Flanchea and Flasgues :— Nos. 108, 108 a, and 622. 
Fountain ;— No. 66, PI. V. 

Fourchee ;-^ modification of the Cross Moline ; No. 82, PL III. 
FreUe :— No. 106, PI. IV. 
FwU : — a narrow Lozenge ; No. 106. 

Fylfot :— No. 143, PI. VIII. It is supposed to be a mystic 
symbol It occurs in Brasses at Kemsing, Leuknor, Oakham, 
Shottesbrooke, and Morton Chapel, Oxford. 

Oads, or GaUyngB : — small spikes projecting from the knuckles 
of mediaeval gauntlets. In some instances, small figures in 
metal were substituted for the spikes, as in the gauntlets of the 
BiiACK Prince, still preserved at Canterbury, which have small 
gilt lions for gadlyngs. 
OaUey : — see Lym/phad, 

Oarde^as : — armour to defend the elbow ; See No. 696. 
Oarland : — a wreath, whether of leaves only, or of flowers and 
leaves intermixed. Garlands axe quartered upon the banners 
that are sculptured on the monument of Lord Bourchier, banner- 
bearer of Henry V., at Westminster. They are also blazoned 
upon the banner itself, barry argent and azure, of Balph de Fitz 
William, in the Caerl. Eoll; No. 432, PL XLIX. 
Qaundet : — an armed glove ; No. 146, PI. VIII. 
GemeUeSf or Bars Qemdles: — barrulets placed together in 
couples ; No. 44, PI. II. 

Qimrnd-Bing : — two annulets interlaced. 
Olobe, the Terrestrial, or Sphere : — ^bome in his arms by Sir 
H. Dryden, and in the Crests of the Hopes and the Drakes; 
Nos. 144 A, 144 B, PI. XXVL 



MISGETiLAinQOUS CHARGES. 45 

QoTge^ or Qwrge : — No. 146, PI. VIII., supposed to indicate a 
whirlpool. It appears in tlie Roll of H. III., borne by R. de Gorges. 

Qreeces : — steps. 

GvUee .-—see Chap. XII., and Nos. 260, 251. 

Qyran:— So. 97, T1.1Y. 

Hackle : — see Hemp^dke, 

Hamea, or Etamea : — part of a horse's harness ; a badge of the 
St. John's. 

Hammer^ or Martd : — an early charge. John de Martell, in 
the thirteenth century, bore, w., three hammers org. ; No. 146 a, 
PI. LXIX. ; in the example the charges are drawn from a re- 
markable military effigy of the period, at Great Malvern : heraldic 
hammers are also sculptured upon an equally remarkable effigy 
of a lady at Selby, in Yorkshire. 

Hcarp : — the national Device of Ireland ; No. 537 a : see Notes 
and Queries, 1st Series, XII., 328, 350. 

Haichet : — an early charge. Thus, in the 13th century ,Wm. de 
HuRSTHELYE borc, oz., three hatchets org, ; No. 146 fi, PI. LXIX. 

HawVs-lwre : — a decoy used by falconers, and composed of two 
wings with their tips downwards, joined with a line and ring ; 
No. 147, PI. IX. 

Hawks hells and jesses: — ^bells, with the leather straps for 
fastening them to the hawk's legs ; borne on a chevron by Baron 
Llanover; No. 148. 

Hdmj Heaume, Helmet : — defensive armour for the head. This 
charge is variously modified, in accordance with the varieties of 
the early head-pieces. Thus, the Earl of Cardigan bears (hree 
morions, or steel caps, while the Marquis of Gholmondelet bears, 
with a garbe, two helmets. In the thirteenth century, John 
Daubeny bore, «o., (hree hdms org.; No. 144, PL LXIX. See 
Helm, Chap. XIV. 

Hemp-hracke, or HacMe : — a serrated instrument, formerly used 
for bruising hemp; borne by Sir 6. F. Hampson, Baronet; 
No. 149, PI. IK. 



46 MISCELLANEOUS CHARGES. 

Hone-Bhoe : — a charge borne in the arms of the Ferrers, Earls 
of Derby, who appear to have derived it from the Marshals. 
When the Earls Ferrers changed their shield to vairSe or &lt;xnd 
gu,&lt;, they placed their golden horse-shoes upon a hordure azure ; 
No. 463, Plate LL Sometimes blazoned a Fen. 

HufUing-hom : — a curved horn, the crest of De Brtenne; 
No. 267, Plat© XXVI. When it has a belt or bandrick, it is 
said to be stringed; No. 150, PL IX. 

Hurte ;— a bine ronndle ; No. 62, PI. II. 

Jandin : — a short barbed spear. 

Jesses : — straps for hawks* bells. 

Key : — ^bome in the arms of several of the Bishops and others. 

Knot : — see Chap. XVII., Section 4. 

Label: — a narrow riband or bar, having three, four, or five 
pendants or points: it is always borne in chief, and should 
extend across the Field ; No. 112, PL IV. The Label is the 
Difference which distinguishes an Eldest Son, except in Boyal 
Cadency. See Chaps. XV., XVI., and XIX., Section 7. A Label 
is sometimes borne as a sole Charge : and in Foreign Heraldry 
Labels of a single point or of six points occasionally appear : see 
Chap. XXXII. ; see also p. 33. 

Leash : — a strap, or other similar coupling or fastening. 

Letters of the Alphabet are sometimes used as Charges. 

Lozenge : — No. 104. The arms of an unmarried lady and of a 
widow are placed upon a Lozenge, and not on a Shield. 

Lure : — see HawVs-lure. 

Lymphad : — a galley of early times, having one mast, but also 
propelled by oars. It is blazoned with its sail furled, and with 
its colours flying. The Lymphad is borne by the Duke of 
Argtll and the Marquis of Abercorn. It was also the device of 
the Macdonalds, the Lords of Lorn, and it appears repeatedly 
upon their monumental memorials at lona; No. 151, PL IX. 

Manche, or Maunche: — a sleeve having long pendant ends, 
worn in the time of Henry I. It has been borne from an early 



MISCELLANEOUS GHARGBS. 47 

period by the family of Hastings. The preyalent modes of 
representiiig the Maunche in Heraldry are shown in Nos. 152, 
152 A, PL IX., and Na 338 a, Chap. XIV. 

Marid : — a Hammer. 

Maade: — a voided Lozenge; Nos. 109, 441, 442. 

MJ3BrT%nA^ or Fer-de-Mdine : — the iron afi^ed to the centre of 
a mill-stone ; No. 153. It is a modification of the Cross Mdtne, 
No. 75, which in a Boll of Edwakd I. is styled a Fer-de-Mdine : 
thus Gut Ferre bears, gu,^ a fer-de-moline atg.y ooer aU a 
hendlet az.; No. 153 a. It is also the bearing of De Mouneb, 

or MOLTNEUX. 

Mitre : — This episcopal ensign is borne in the arms of the Sees 
of Norwich, Chester, LlandafiT, Meath, and others : see MUre in 
Chap. Xin. A Mitre is the Crest of the Berkelets. 

Mdine : — a cross terminating like a Mill-rind ; No. 75. 

Marion : — ^a steel cap. 

Morse : — a clasp, usually enriched with varied ornamentation. 

Mortier : — a cap of estate. 

MoufU: — ^the base of a shield, when made to represent a 
hillock, and tinctured vert. 

MuUd: — a star of five points or rays, all formed by right 
lines, as No. 154. This Charge is also borne with six, or eight, 
or even more points, but the rays are always straight, and thus 
the Mullet essentially differs from the EstaUe^ the rays of which 
are always wavy. When they exceed five in number, the rays 
of the Mullet must be specified; thus, No. 155 is a MuUei of 
six points. See also No. 127^ Fl. YI. This favourite Charge, 
so well known in the first quarter of the shield of the De 
Veres, No. 156, PI. YI. {Quarterly gu. and or, a Mullet arg.\ 
may be regarded as representing the Bowd of a Spur, and it is 
often pierced. No. 157 (to be indicated in blazon), as if to 
exhibit the adjustment of the rowel to its axis. A pierced 
mullet, which appears to demonstrate conclusively the deriva- 
tion of this Charge from a pointed spur-rouelle, appears as the 



48 MISCELLANEOUS CHARGES. 

orest of Sir John Dattbyoni^, upon his monumental slab at 
Norton Brise, Oxfordshire, a.d. 1345; No. 408. In Cadency, 
the Mullet is the difference of ^e Third Son. See Plates 
XXVIII. and XXXVII. 

Ogre$8 :— a Pellet. 

Ordinaries: — ^the nine primary simple Charges of Heraldiy: 
see Chap. V. 

OreQler : — ^a cushion or pillow. 

Orle ;— No. 100, PI. IV. : see p. 31. 

Padlock ;— a Badge of John of Ghent, Duke of Lancaster. 

Pale .-—one of the Ordinaries ; No. 36, PI. 11. 

PaU: — an archi-episcopal vestment, worn by the Eoman 
hierarchy, and indicatiye of the order and rank of Archbishops. 
In Heraldry, the PaU, of which one half only is displayed, in 
form closely resembles the letter Y, and it is always charged 
with crosses pat^es fitch^es. It is borne in the arms of the 
archi-episcopal sees of Canterbury, Armagh, and Dubun; 
No. 255. As a vestment, the Pall is a narrow circular band of 
white lamb's-wool, which is adjusted about the shoulders, and 
has two similar bands hanging down from it, the one before, 
and the other behind. It is clearly shown in the Effigies and 
Brasses of Archbishops at Canterbury, York, Westminster, Oxford, 
and elsewhere ; in the early Effigies and Brasses of Ecclesiastics 
not of episcopal rank, it is frequently represented in embroidery 
upon the Chesuble, as in the sculptured Effigy at Beverley, and in 
the incised Brasses at St. Albaii's, North Mimms, and Wensley ; 
No. 158, PI. IX. See Archbishop, Chap. XIII. 

Pallet :— a diminutive of the Pale : see Chap. V. 

Palmer's Staff, or PUgrim's Staff, in French Heraldry, JBour- 
don : — an early Charge. This device appears on a slab at Halt- 
whistle. In one of the earliest Rolls, John Bourdon bears, arg., 
three Palmer's Staves gu. ; No. 158 A, PI. LXIX. 

Pastoral Staff:— the official staff of a Bishop or Abbot, l^tving 
a crooked head. No. 159, PL XV., and thus is distinguished from 



MISCELLANEOUS CHARGES. 49 

an Archbishop's Crozier, the head of which is cruciform, No. 160, 
PL XV. (See Orozier in Chap. XIII.) A VexiUum, or scarf, 
hangs from almost all representations of the Pastoral Staff, 
encircling its shaft. The earlier examples are generally very 
plain; hut the custom of richly adorning this staff was prevalent 
also fiDm an early period. The enamelled staff of Bishop 
WiLUAM OF Wykeham, preserved in New College, Oxford, is a 
splendid specimen of the second half of the fourteenth century. 
The Pastoral Staff is borne in the arms of Westminster Abbey, 
No. 599, PI. XLVIL ; in those of the See of Llandafp, &amp;c. See 
Bishop in Chap. XIII. 

Patee, or Formee : — a variety of the Cross; No. 86, PL III. 

Patee, or FormSe Fitchie : — a similar Cross, pointed at the foot ; 
No. 86, PL in. 

Potofice:— a Cross, of which the four arms expand in curves 
from the centre, and the ends are foliated ; No. 77, PL III. 

Patriarchal : — a Cross which has its head crossed horizontally ; 
No. 68, PL III. 

Pauldron : — armour to defend the shoulder. 

Pe22e&lt; : — a black spherical roundle ; No. 54, PL II. 

Penner and Inkhom: — a pen-case and vessel containing ink, 
as they were carried in the Middle Ages by Notaries, appended 
to their girdles f No. 161, PL IX. The Penner and Inkhom 
are represented in two Brasses of Notaries, a.d. 1475 and 1566, 
preserved in the Church of St. Mary Tower, Ipswich; in a 
monument in Oxford Cathedral, about aj&gt;. 1503 ; and in a very 
interesting monumental slab, at Sawley Abbey, Lancashire. 
Other early examples have also been noticed. 

Phem ;— the barbed head of a spear or arrow, No. 162. Un- 
less the contrary be specified, the point of the Pheon is blazoned 
to the base, as in the arms of the Earl Brownlow, and the Baron 
De L'Isle. 

Pickaxe, or Pic ;— an early Charge, borne by a De Pickworth : 
Boll of Edward III. 

E 



/ 



50 MISCELLANEOUS CHARGES. 

Pile .'—No, 41. 

Pillow : — see Ouahion, 

PUcher : — see Flagon, 

Plcde : — a silver or white flat roundle ; No. 61. 

Playing Tablea :~a chess-board. 

Point8 : — ^the pendants of a Label. 

Pomme .-t-a green spherical roundle ; No. 55. 

PommSe : — a form of Cross ; No. 81. 

PortcuUie : — a defence for a gateway, formed of transverse bars 
bolted together, the vertical bars terminating in base in pheons. 
In Heraldry, a Portcullis is always represented as having rings 
at its uppermost angles, from which chains depend on either 
side ; No. 163, PI. IX. This charge is the well-known Badge of 
the Beauforts, and through them of the Tudor Princes : it is 
borne in the arms of Westminster City, No. 607, PI. XLVIL, and 
of Ulster King-of-Arms, No. 606, PI. XLVI. See also Herald. 

Puree: — ^represented as worn in the middle ages suspended 
from the girdle. The badge of Cromwell of Tateshall. 

Quadrate : — squared ; a form of the Cross ; No. 72, PI. III. 

Quarter :— the first quarter of the Shield, now superseded in 
use by the Canton. 

Quarter-Pierced, and Quarterly-Pierced ;— Nos. 73, 74., PI. III. 

QuatrefoU : — a figure formed of four curved leaves. In arohi- 
teoture, a Quatrefoil within a circle, or a square, or a lozenge 
panel, very commonly contains an heraldic shield ; as in Nos. 
164, and 164 b, PL XV. 

Bainbow: — borne with their Crest by the Hopes; No. 144 a, 
PI. XXVI. 

Bapier :— a narrow stabbii^ sword. 

Bays: — when drawn round a figure of the disc of the sun, 
heraldic rays are sixteen in number, and they are alternately 
straight and wavy. 

BecerceUe : — curled; a form of the Cross ; No. 76, PI. III. 

Best :— see Clarion. 



MISCKLLAMBOUS CHAKOBS. 51 

Btbcmd : — a diminiitiye of the Bend. See Gbap. VI. 
Baundle^ or Bondelei : — a circtilar Gbai^e, which, when of metal, 
is flat, but when of colour, spherical. Bee Chap. V. 
J8iw/re;— No. 110, PL IV. 

Saltire:— one of the Oidinaries; Nos. 39, 49, PI. II. 
Sctding-Ladder :— No. 1 64 a. The Crest of the Greys. 




No. 164 A.— Soalmg-Ladder. 

Scarpe : — a diminutive of the Bend Sinister. 

Seax : — a Saxon weapon, or scimetar, having a curved notch 
cut ofif the back of it near the point; No. 165, PI. IX. It is 
borne in the arms of the County of Middlesex. 

Senue, or Cerise ;— a Torteau. 

Shadde^boU :— see Fetter-Lock. 

Shake-fork: — a Charge resembling a Pall, but humettSe^ and 
pointed; No. 166, PI. IX. It is borne by the Marquess of 

CONYNGHAM. 

Shield : — a sbield is sometimes borne as a Chai^ : thus the 
Hats bear. Argent^ ihree shields gules; No. 167, p. 54; and a 
single shield (or inescutcheon) appears in the well-known 
blazon of the Mortimers, Nos. 99, and 99 a, p. 31. In the BoU 
of H. III., Warin de Monchesmet bears, or^ three shields harry 
voir cmd gu.. No. 447, PI. XLVIII. : and in the Second Boll of 
tbe same era, John Fitz Simon bears, gu,y ihree shields arg., 
reversing the tinctures of the Hays. In addition to their 
habitual use as architectural accessories in every variety of 
early Oothic edifice. Shields of arms, in the Middle Ages, 
were often employed as decorative accessories of costume; 

£ 2 



/ 



52 MISCELLANEOUS CHARGES. 

thus the surcout of Wiluam de Valence, a.d. 1296, at West- 
minster, the Brass of MAJtOABET Lady Camoys, a.d. 1310, at 
Trotton, Sussex, and the effigy of a Lady at Worcester of the 
period of Edward I., are decorated with small Shields of Arms. 
Nine of these shields, originally enamelled, have been taken 
within a few years from the Trotton Brass. For various exam- 
ples of early Shields, see Chap. III. 

Ship: — besides the ancient Chlley^ ships of a more modem 
character appear amongst the Charges of Heraldry: thus, the 
arms of the Corporation of the Trinity House ai^, four Skips I 

under sail gules, cantoned by a Cross of Si. George; No. 168. , 

Spear : — ^bome on a bend by Shakespere ; No. 679, PI. LXIX. 

Spur: — this knightly appointment, which from its associa- 
tions claims the special regard of the Herald, was worn with a 
single goad-like point, and known as the ** Pryck-Spur,'* No. 
169, PI. IX., before the reign of Edwarf) II. About a.d. 1320, 
the Spur having a Wheel began to supersede the earlier form. 
No. 170 : and, shortly after, the true BoueUe Spur, having the 
wheel spiked, made its appearance. No. 171. The examples 
that I have given in Nos. 169, 170, 171, and 172, are from the 
effigies of John op Elthaji ; of a Knight at Clehongre, Here- 
fordshire; of the Black Prince; and of Bichard Delamere, 
Esq., Hereford. In the beginning of the fifteenth century 
spurs appear sometimes to have been worn with Guards to 
their Bouelles; as in No. 172. In the middle of that century 
they became of extravagant length, but towards its close they 
assumed a more sensible form. See Mullet. 

Staple : — an iron fastening, a Badge of the Stapletons. 

Steel-cap : —a close-fitting defence for the head. 

Stirrup .'—this characteristic Charge is of comparatively rare 
occurrence. Ou., ^ree stirrups leathered and buMed or^ were borne 
by ScUDAMORE ; and the same composition on an azure field forms 
the arms of Gifford. This shield is carved in the vaulting of 
the Canterbury Cloisters. A iS^pur erect between a pair of Wings 



MISCEIflfANEOUS CHARGES. 
INANIMiLTE OBJECTS &amp; BADGE OF ULSTER. 

•H.AFIr.RSXI JcXG. 




MISCELLANEOUS CHARGES. 53 

was the Crest of the Marquess of Annandale, a Lord Marcher of 
the olden time. 

Svowd: — ^two iron links connected by a bolt, around which 
they revolve : borne by the Ironmonqebs' Company. 

Sioorri:— the Knightly Weapon of all ages, in Heraldry is 
represented unsheathed, straight in the Blade, and pointed. In 
blazon, the Hilt, Pommel, and Accoutrements of Swords are 
always to be specified. Swords are borne in the Arms of the 
Sees of London, Winchester, Exeter, and Cork. A Sword erect 
also is cantoned by the Cross of St George in the first quarter, 
in the Arms of the City of London ; and in this instance the 
weapon represents the emblem of St. Paul, the patron Saint of 
London, No. 139, p. 64. The Earl Poulett now bears, — Sa, 
three Swords in pUe org,, their points in hasey kilts and pommels or^ 
No. 173, PI. XIV. 

Target : — a circular Shield, represented in the curious armed 
eflSgy of the period of Henry III., at Great Malvern. 

Tau : — a Cross resembling the letter T, called also the Cross 
of St. Anthony; No. 59, PI. III. See Chap. XX., 3. 

ThresUe : a three-legged stool. 

TiUingSpear : — a heavy lance. See Spear, 

Torch : — generally borne inflamed, or lighted. 

Torse : — a wreath. 

TorteaUf plural Torteaux : — A red spherical Roundle. 

Tower :— a small Castle ; No. 173 a, PI. IX. 

Treflee : — ^the same as BotonSe, — trefoiled, that is. 

TreiUe, or TreUise : — ^lattice-work. It differs from Fretle, and 
FreUee, in that the pieces do not interlace under and over, but 
cross each other in such a manner that all the pieces from the 
dexter are in the same plane, and they lie over those from the 
sinister, and they all are fastened by nails at the crossings. 
A Treille is said to be clouSe of its Nails; No. 174, PI. IX. 

Tressure :^one of the Subordinaries. See Tressure, p. 32, and 
No. 102, PL IV. It is commonly blazoned as fleurie. The Koyal 



54 MISCELLANEOUS CHARGES. 

Tbessure of Scotland is blazoned as a Double I^esiure, fleurie 
counter-fteurie ; No. 103, PI. V. 

Trumpet: — in Heraldry, a long straight tube, expanding to- 
wards its extremity : it is well exemplified in the Brass to Sir 
EoGER DE Trumpingdon; No8. 176, PL IX., and 376, PI. XLVIII. 

Tun :— a cask. It occurs constantly to represent the syllable 
TON in a Bebus upon some name ending in that syllable : thus, 
at St. John's, Cambridge, the Rebus of Ashton is an ashrtree 
growing out of a tun ; in Bristol Cathedral, Abbot Burton's Hebus, 
a hurr plant growing out of a tun^ is carved in several places ; and 
again, a tun pierced hy an arrow or holt frequently occurs as the 
Rebus of Bolton. See Bebus in Chap. XIII. 

Voir .-—one of the Furs ; Nos. 29, 30, p. 20. 

Vambrace : — armour for the fore-arm. 

VampUUe :— a guard for the hand upon a tilting-spear. 

Verules .'—concentric rings or annulets. 

Vervels, or Varvels : — small rings. 

Water-Bouget : — a vessel used by mediaeval soldiers for caiTy- 
ing water. It is borne by the Baron De Ros, and by the 
BouRGHiERS. Two modifications of the form of this Charge 
are shown in No. 176, PI. IX. See also No. 338 a, in Chap. 
XIY. On the shield of a crossed-legged knight in the Temple 
Church, which is attributed to a De Ros, three water-bougets 
are very boldly sculptured ; the effigy is of the period of Ed- 
ward I. : and again, good later examples appear on the banners 
that are represented in the monument of Louis Robsart, Lord 
Bourchier, the standard-bearer of Henry V., at Westminster. 

Winnowing-Fan : — see Fan, 





No. 130.— London. No. 167.— Hay. 





No. 185.— The Pbbcy Lion. No. 186.— The Howard Liou. 



CHAPTER X. 

MISCELLANEOUS 0HAROE8. 

PART II.— ANIMATE BEINGS. 

This Group of Charges comprises, with a varied series of 
Creatures that exist in Nature, several others that are indebted 
for their shadowy existence only to the poetic imagination of 
the early Heralds. Those Parts of the Bodies of Animals also, 
which constitute distinct Heraldic Charges, I have associated 
with the Creatures themselves ; and the whole have been sub- 
jected to a classified arrangement. 

1. Human Beings occasionally appear in heraldic composi- 
tions, in which case the blazon always expresses with consistent 
distinctness the attitude, costume, action, &amp;c., of every figure. 
Human figures, however^ generally occur as Supporters, or 
Crests; and Parts of the human body are more frequently 
introduced than actual Figures. 

Human figures appear in the arms of the Sees of Sausbubt,- 
Chichester, L1NCOL17, Cloqher, and Waterfobd. In the 
Arms of the See of Oxford are three demi-figures. The Head 
and the Hands of a man, when they appear as Charges, must 
be so blazoned as to define and describe their position, &lt;&amp;c. 
Thus, a head would be in profile^ or affraniee, or reguardani, or 



56 MISCELLANEOUS CHARGES. 

uncovered, or helmed, &amp;c. ; and the Hand would be either the 
Dexter, or the Sinister, or erect, or grasping some object, &lt;fec. ; 
an open hand is said to be appaumSe. The same would be 
the case with an Arm, which, when bent at the elbow, is em- 
bowed, &amp;c. The very singular armorial ensign of the Isle of 
Man, now quartered by the Duke of Athol, is thus blazoned : 
Qidea, three Legs armed proper, conjoined in the Fesse point at 
Ae upper part of the thighs, flexed in a triangle, garnished and 
spurred or ; No. 1 76 A, PL XIV. : this example is diawn from a 
Roll of Edward I., preserved in the Heralds' College. See Isle 
OF Man in Chap. XXXIII. Archbishop Jdxon, who died a.d. 1663, 
bore — Or, a Cross gu., between fauir Blackamoors^ Heads, couped at 
the shoulders ppr., toreaihed about the temples ofthefidd. The same 
Charge is borne by the Earl Canning. The Badge of Ulster, 
the distinctive Ensign of the Order and Eank of Baronets, 
instituted in 1612, by James I., the ancient armorial Ensign of 
the Irish Kingdom of Ulster, is thus blazoned, upon a small 
shield— iir()r., a Sinister Hand, couped at the wrist and erect, gu. ; 
No. 177, PI. IX. 

Inseparably associated with their historic name, the Dou- 
glases bear, as the armorial insignia of their house, Arg,, a 
human Heart gu., imperially crowned ppr, ; on a Chief az., three 
Mullets ofthefleld. The royal Heart was that of Bobert Bruce, 
which the " Good Sir James Douglas" was carrying to the Holy 
Land, that he might bury it at Jerusalem, when he himself fell 
in battle with the Saracens of Andalusia, a.d. 1330. The crown 
is a comparatively recent addition to the original Charge ; No. 
177 A, PL XIV. See Arms of Douglas, Chap. XXXIII. 

11. The Heraldry of the Lion. The King of Beasts is 
the animal which, as a Charge of Heraldry, has always been 
held in the very highest estimation. He appears in heraldic 
Blazonry under the most varied conditions, and in association 
with almost every other device. I have considered it to be 



HERAIrDRY OF THE 1x101:. 



HAF-TER Xl 




Pl.tf^ X 



MISCELLANEOUS CHARGES. o7 

desirable, accordingly, to assign to the '' Heraldiy of the Lion,** 
a distinct section of its own. 

The Lion was not only the favourite Beast with the early 
Heralds, but also almost the only one that they introduced into 
their blazon. And they considered that the natural and proper 
attitude for their lions was ramipcaaJt — erect, looking intently 
before them towards their prey, and preparing to make their 
formidable spring. To the Lion in this attitude, accordingly, 
the early Heralds applied his true title, and they blazoned 
him as *'a Lion." But, when he was to be represented as 
in the act of walking, whether with his h^ad in profile or 
looking outwards from the shield, whether simply patiatU or 
passant guardatU, they entitled the royal beast a " Lion-leoparde" 
a *' LUm Leopard" or simply a " Leopard." Hence the Lions of 
England are found to have been habitually blazoned as Leopards 
Q^Lupards" ^ Leoparts") until the fifteenth century was far 
advanced ; then, at length, the Lion of Heraldry, whatever his 
attitude and his action, received his true name, which he has 
retained under all circumstances until our own times. In the 
Roll of Arms of Henry ITI. the first entry is, " Le Bay d'Anghterre 
parte goules trois lupards dHor :" so, again, the statute of Edw. I. 
(a.I). 1300, 28 E. I., cap. 20) ordains that all pieces of gold and 
silver plate, when assayed, should be ^^signee de une teste de 
leopari" — ^marked, that is, with the head of the King's Lion- 
leopard^. 

The Lion is borne in heraldic Compositions emblazoned in 
fourteen varieties of attitude. 

1. Hie Lion Passant^ No. 178, PL X., is walking, and has three 
of his paws placed on the ground, the fourth (one of the fore 
paws) being raised up. He looks in the direction that he is 
walking, which, unless the contrary be specified, is towards 
the Dexter. This Lion was borne by the L'Estranges, No. 660, 
Fl. LXII., and the Garews, and it is now charged upon a Fesse 
by the Earl of Cauysfort. 



58 MISCELLANIiX)US CIIAROlilS. 

2. The Lion Passant Ouardani^ No. 179, differs from the 
Lion Passant, in the circumstance that he is affranti — looking 
out from the shield at the spectator. A Qdden Lion Passant 
Quardanty upon a Field gules, is a Lion of England ; No. 198. 

3. The Lion Passant Beguardani, is walking in the same 
manner and towards the same direction as No. 179, but he 
looks hack to the Sinister; No. 179 a, PI. X. 

4. The Lion Bampant, No. 180, stands erect on his two hind 
legs, but has only one of his fore legs elevated. 

The Scottish Lion is Rampant, his Tincture being gtdes, on 
afidd or : No. 103, PI. V., and Plates XXII., LVIIL, and LIX. : 
thus. Sir Walter Scott, speaking of the Boyal Banner of Scot- 
land, says that upon it 

** The ruddy lion ramps in gold." 

5. The Lion Bampant Ouardant, No. 181, is the same as 
the Lion Eampant, except that he is affronte, instead of looking 
before him. The Dexter Suppoiter of England is such a Lion, 
of gold, lliis is the habitual attitude of Lions when they are 
Supporters. 

6. llie Lion Bampant Beguardant, No. 182, looks behind 
him. Such Lions are the Supporters of the Bai'ons Braybroke 
and Brownlow. 

7. The Lion Salienty No. 183, is in the act of making his 
spring, erect, with both his fore paws elevated. 

8. Ttoo Lions Comhattant, No. 184, are Bampant and face to 
face, as if in combat. They may also be blazoned as Counter 
Bampant. They were thus charged upon the shield of Bi- 
CHARD I., before he assumed upon it the three Lions Passant. 
Two Lions Combattant are now borne by the Viscount 
Lorton. In Foreign Heraldry if two Coats of Anns are im- 
paled, each of which bears a Lion Bampant, the two Lions are 
placed Counter Bampantj &amp;cing each other on the impaled 
shield ; See No. 344, PI. XXIL, and No. 722, PI. LIL 



MISCELLANEOUS CHARGES. 59 

9. A Lion Stakmt has bis four feet upon the ground, and 
looks before him. A Lion Statant, having his Tail extended 
in a right line, is the Crest of the Duke of Northumbebland ; 
No. 185, p. 55. 

10. A Lion Statani Chuurdant^ stands looking affironU, Such 
a Lion, having his tail extended in a right line, is the Crest of 
the Duke of Norfolk : No. 186, p. 65. 

11. When sitting down, his four legs being stretched out 
on the ground, but his head erect, a Lion is Sefani; No. 187. 

12. A Lion Sefant, having his fore legs elevated, is Sefant 
Bampani ; No. 187 a, PI. X. 

13. When in the attitude* of taking repose, the Lion is 
CouchaiUj or Dormant ; No. 187 b. 

14. A Lion Coward^ is passant with a downcast look, and 
his tail between his legs; No. 187 c, drawn from a Seal of 
Arthur Tudor, as Prince of Wales. 




No. 187 c. — Lion Coward. 

A Demi Lion Bampant, No. 188, PI. X., and No. 131 a, PI. XIV., 
is the upper half of the body of the animal, and half its tail 
with the tuft in which it terminates. 

Lions occur so constantly in Bolls of Arms and in other 
early authorities, that I do not consider it necessary continually 
to refer to examples. 

A Lion's Face^ No. 189, PI. X., is a Charge : and his Head 
also is a Charge that frequently occurs ; it may be either eowped, 
No., 190, or erased, No. 191. See Chap. XXX. 

The entire leg, No 192, PI. X., is a Lion's Jambe, or Ckimbe, 
when borne alone ; but if the limb be cut off, whether erased or 
coupedj at or below the middle joint, it is a Paw. 



60 MISCELLANEOUS CHARGES. 

Two Lions Rampant, placed back to back, are addarBed ; No. 
' 193. If they are paasani, the one to the Dexter, and the other 
to the Sinister, they are Caunier-paasarU, 

The Lion is fre^juently crowned, No. 194, PL X., and Nos. 
416, 417, ri. XXXVIIL, &amp;c. ; or he grasps some object in either 
his mouth or his paw, No. 195, PL X. ; or ho is collared, and 
perhaps a chain may be attached to his collar. No. 196 ; or he 
may have his neck gorged (encircled, that is,) with a coronet ; 
or his body may be charged with various devices ; or he may 
be Vi^fiafUf or Vorant — watching for his prey, or devouring it ; 
or he may have Wings, as in the instance of the Supporters 
of the Baroness Braye; or he may be double tailed. No. 197, 
PI. X. (gueua fourchSe), as he was borne by the De Montforts, 
No. 399, PL XLIX. 

A Lion is said to be armed of his claws and teeth, and langued 
of his tongue. 

When an Ordinary is set over a Lion, the animal is ddn-uised 
by such Ordinary. 

When a Lion is represented as proceeding or rising up out 
of a Chief, or Fesse, or any other Charge, he is said to be 
iasuarU, or naisaant — as in the Arms of the De Genevilles, No. 
^31 A, PI. XIY. A Lion Naissant is now borne upon a chief 
by the Baron Dormer. 

Several Lions^ whether Passant, or EamparU, may be charged 
upon a single shield ; thus, Exqland bears, gu., three Lions pass, 
guard,, in pale, or, No. 198 ; and the Earl of Pembroke bears— ^' 
pale az, and gu,, three Lions Bampanl, ttoo and one, arg.. No. 199, 
Pl.X. 

When more than four Ijions occur in the same composition, 
they are termed Lioncels, In this case, the animals are almost 
invariably Kampant. When charged upon an Oi*dinaiy, even 
two or three Lions would bo entitled Lioncels^aa in the chevron 
of the CoBHAMS; No. 377, PI. XXV. The Shield, No. 200, of 
William Longespee, Earl of Salisbury, who died a.d. 1226, 



MISCELLANEOUS CHARGES. 



61 



bears six Lioncels upon a Field azure. Another fine early 
example is the Shield of the De Bohuns, Earls of Hereford, 




No. 198.— England. 
The Crown and Shield of the time of Heniy IIL 

which is thus blazoned : Azure, a Bend org,, cotised and between 
six Umeek or: Nos. 201, 397, and PI. XX. Amongst the 
other celebrated names with which the Lion is associated as 
an heraldic charge, are Percy, De Laci, Fitz Alan, Mowbray, 
De Bruce, Sbqrave, &amp;c., &amp;c. See Chap. XXXI. 

The Lion is borne of every variety of Tincture. He is 
always armed and langued, gtdea ; unless he himself or the 
field be of that colour, in which case both his claws and his 
tongue are azure, 

I have considered the Drawing of the Lion in Chap. XXX. 



III. Various other Animals take those parts which Heralds 
have been pleased to assign to them ; their especial vocation, 
however, appears to be to act as Supporters. As Charges, the 
Horse, the Elephant, the Camel, the Dog, the Stag, the Ante- 
lope, the Tiger, the Leopard, the Bear, the Bull, the Calf, the 



62 MISCELLANEOUS CHARGES. 

Goat, the Ram, the Lamb, the Boar (Scmglier), the Fox, the 
Wolf, the Cat-a-moimtain or Wild Cat, the Ermine, the Hedge- 
hog, the Beaver, the Otter, the Squirrel, and many others 
will attract the attention of the student. The Heads of many 
Animals also appear in Blazonry. The example of an Ermine, 
No. 199 A, is drawn from the Garter-Plate of Lord Dynham, 
E.G., at Windsor, who died a.d. 1501. The animal stands 




* No. 199 A.— The Ermine Great of Lord Dynham, K.G. 

upon a cap of Estate, between two spikes, and thus forms a 
Crest. In every instance, the terms that give a precise and de- 
finite individuality to each animal may easily be acquired. 

The terms that are applied to Lions are also applicable to all 
beasts of prey. Any animal in a sitting posture is Sejant^ and 
StatatU when standing ; and, in like manner, other terms, which 
have no special reference to habits of violence and ferocity, are 
alike applicable to every animal. 

Stags and their kindred animals have several terms peculiarly 
their own. Their antlers are Attires, the branches being Tynes ; 
when they stand, they are at gaze, No. 202, PI. XI. ; when in 
easy motion, they are tripping. No. 203 ; when in rapid motion, 
they are at speed. No. 203 a ; and when at rest, they are lodged. 
No. 204, PL XI. 

All the fiercer animals are armed of their boms ; but a stag 
is attired of his antlers. 



MISCEIrli-ANEOUS CHARGES. 

ANIMATE BEINGS. 



.H.^py^' XI 




h.wt:- A- 



MISCELLANKOUS CHARGES. 63 

The Attires of Stags are borne as separate Chains. The 
Head of a stag, when placed affromte, is cahosied. No. 205, Fl. XI. ; 
this is the well known charge of the families of Stanley and 
Cavendish, the former bearing, &lt;m a bend az., three stags' heads 
cdbossedy org. ; the latter a similar number of the same device, 
arg.y upon a sable fidd ; Nos. 205 a, 205 b, PI. XIV. 

A stag, full-grown and of mature age, is generally styled a 
Hart ; the female, without Horns, is a Hind, ^ A Heindeer^ in 
Heraldiy, is represented as a stag with double attires. The 
Bear and Bagged Staff, No. 206, Fl. XXX., form the &amp;mou8 
Badge of the Earls of Warwick ; and the Talbot Dog, No. 207, 
Fl. XL, is the Badge of the Earls of Shrewsbuby. Another 
heraldic Dog, a mastiff with short ears, is distinguished as an 
Alant, Greyhounds, again, have found favour with Heralds. 
The Marquis Camden bears on his shield three Elephants' 
heads. The Baron Blayney bears three Horse's heads. The 
Bupportei-s of the Earl of Orkney are an Antelope and a Stag ; 
those of the Baron Macdonald are two Leopards ; and those of 
the Duke of Bedford are a Lion and an Antelope, the Kussell 
crest being a Goat. The Earl of Malmesbury bears three Hedge- 
hogs ; and two Foxes are leaping, saltire-wise, on the ancient 
shield of Sib Watktn Williams Wynne. The Feerage will also 
give many examples of various other animals acting as heraldic 
Supporters. See Armes ParUmtes and Behus in Chap. XIII. 

A singular Charge, that must be placed with this group, 
was borne by the De Cantelupes, and it also constitutes the 
Arms of the See of Hereford: this is a Leopard's face, 
affronte, resting upon a Fleur-de-Lys, and having the lower 
part of the flower issuing from the animal's mouth. In the 
Hereford shield, the Leopard's faces are reversed. This is 
emblazoned br jessant^e-lys ; Nos. 208, 208 a, Fl. XI., and 436 c, 
PL XXXIX. 

IV. Birds, Pishes, Insects, and Reptiles, also, form 



64 MISCELLANEOUS CHARGES. 

Charges of Heraldry. They appear in Blazon under their 
habitual natural guise : but there are descriptive terms used 
by Heralds, which these creatures may claim as exclusively 
their own. 

Birds in the act of flight are vciairU, when flying aloft they 
are soaring, and their expanded wings are said to be overt; 
No. 209. In the instance of Birds of Prey, the expanded wings 
are also said to be displayed, while those of all birds that are 
not Birds of Prey, are disclosed. If the tips of the wings droop 
downwards, they are inverted, or in Ijure; No. 210, PI. XL : 
but, if elevated without being expanded, the wings are erect; 
No. 211: and if turned backwards, addorsed ; Nos. 212, 213. 
A Bird, about to take wing, is rising or roitssant ; but trussed 
or closed, No. 216, when at rest. A Bird preying on another, 
No. 212, is trussing it, and not vorani, as a Beast of Prey. The 
Example, No. 212, is drawn from the Brass of Sir Peter 
CouRTENAY, K.G., (a.d. 1409) in Exeter Cathedral. 

A Hawk is belled and jessed. 

A Qame-cock is anmed of his Beak and Spurs, crested of his 
Comb, sxid. jouiopped of his Wattles, or simply noaided. 

A Peacd^, or Pawne, having its tail displayed, is in its 
pride, as it is borne by the Duke of Eutland for his crest. 

An Eagle, or Erne, with expanded wings. No. 212 a, is dis- 
played; as borne by the Montmorengies and the Mont- 
HERMEBs, and quartered by the Montagues. An Eagle appears 
on the seal of Eichard, Earl of Cornwall, supporting his 
Shield of Arms from its beak, about a.d. 1260 ; No. 212 c, 
PI. LXII. See Chap. XXX. 

A young, or a small eagle, is an Eaglet ; No. 459, PI. XLIX. 

An Imperial Eagle has two heads, and is crowned, as No. 
212 B, PI. XI., and No. 349, PI. XXIII. In the RoU of 
Edward II., Sir Walter Baud bears, gu., three eagle's wings or. 

The two wings of an Eagle displayed, when conjoined and 
borne as a charge, are blazoned as a Vol. 



MISCELLANEOUS CHAPGES. 65 

A PeHcatiy represented as standing above its nest, having 
its wings addorsed, and nourishing its young with its blood, 
is blazoned as a Pelican in its Piety. The example, No 213, 
PI. XT., forms the finial of the fine Brass to Dean Prestwych, 
at Warbleton, Sussex, a.d. 1436. 

A Swan, when blazoned proper, is white, with red beak, and 
has some black about the nostrils. Such a Swan, ducallj 
gorged and chained, was the Badge of the De Bohuns, No. 
214, PI. XI., and No. 234 b, PI. XH. See also No. 511. 

Various sea-birds appear in blazon : thus, the Crest of Sir 
Richard Pole, E.G., the father of the Cardinal, is a Cormorant 
preying on a fish. 

A Cornish Chough, No. 215, the crest of the Baron Bridport, 
is black, with red legs and beak. 

Small Birds are generally drawn in the form of Blackbirds, 
but their colour must be blazoned. 

The MarOet, or Merlotte, No. 216 and 216 a, PI. XL, may be 
regarded as the heraldic swallow. In Cadency, the Martlet is 
the Difference of the fourth son ; No. 382, PI. XIII. It was 
borne by the De Valences, No. 101, PI. V., and PI. VII., Nos. 
419, 420; and in the Arms of Edward the Confessor, No. 78, 
PI. I., and 349, 350, PI. XXIII. See also Nos. 365, 369, 
PI. XXV., and Nos. 412, 413, PI. XLVIII. The Martlet is 
generally represented without feet, as in No. 216 a ; but the feet 
are drawn correctly in many early examples. It now is (charged 
upon the shield of the Earl of Arundel. 

Ravens, Parrots called by Heralds Popinjays (see No. 458, PI. 
XL.), Herons, FalcoTis, Cocks, Doves or Colombs, and many 
others, and the Wings of birds in various attitudes, and their 
Feathers also under various conditions, appear in Heraldry. See 
Armes Parlantes and Bdms, in Chap. XIII. 

Fish of every variety are borne as heraldic Charges ; but 
when no particular . variety is specified and the creature is of 
small size, the blazon simply states the Charge to be ** a fish." 

F 



66 MISCELLANEOUS CHARGES. 

When swimming in /esse, across the field, a fish is naiant ; 
No. 217, PI. XI. When in pale. No. 218, as if rising to the 
surface for breathing, it is havriant ; but uriant when its head 
is in base, No. 218 a ; and when its body is bent, as a dolphin 
is represented, it is embowed; No. 219. A good example of an 




No. 219 A.— Dolphin. Brass io Nicholas Aumbebdenk. 

heraldic Dolphin appears at the base of the Cross-biass to 
Nicholas Aumberdene, " Fishmonger of London," a.d. 1360, 
at Taplow, Bucks, No. 219 a. 

The fish borne by the Duke of Northumberla;7d are staled 
lAideSy a kind of pike. Amongst the other fish commonly borne 
in Heraldry are Barbels, Nos. 325, PI. XVIIL, and 329 a, 
PI. XIX. ; Herrings, Boach, &amp;o, " The Heraldry of Fish " forms 
the subject of a beautiful and valuable monograph by Mr. Moule. 

Various Shells occur in Heraldry, and particularly the 
EscaUop, No. 220, borne by the Edssells and the Grahams : 
See Nos. 388, PL XLVIIL, 402, PL XXXVIL, and 409, 
PL XXVIII. : see also No. 513, PI. XXXIX. 

Bees and Butterflies are blazoned vokmi, thus, — Az,, three huUer- 
flies vdani or, are the arms of Muscamp: this shield is in the 
cloisters at Canterbury. A Tortoise is passant. A Snake (in Boll of 
E. Hi. a ^^Bisse ") may be gliding, or if twined into a knot it is nowed. 

Imaginary Beings. Heralds have introduced amongst the 
figures that act as both Supporters and Charges, imaginary* 
representations of the heavenly hierarchy. Thus Angels form 
the Supporters of the Barons Decies, Northwick and Abinger, 
of Sir M. Barlow, Bart., and others. 



MISCEI/LANEOUS CHARGES. 

ANIMATE BEINGS &amp; NATURAIr OBJECTS. 




MISCELLANEOUS CHAROES. 67 

Several animal forms have been added by Heralds, from their 
own creatiye imaginations, to those which Nature has provided 
for them to introduce into their symbolical blassonry. A few 
only of these occur in English Heraldry. 

The AUenon,—asL eagle destitute of both beak and feet. The 
same term is also sometimes applied to heraldic natural eagles. 

The Cockatrice, No. 221, PL XIL, a winged monster, having 
the head, body, and feet of a cock, and the tail of a dragon ; 
borne for Supporters and Crest by the Earl of Donoughmobk 
The head of a Cockatrice is borne as a Crest, and is represented 
in the Brasses to Sib N. Daqworth, a.d. 1401, at Blickling, 
Norfolk, No. 222, and to Booer Elmebrtgge, a.d. 1435, at 
Bedington, Surrey, No. 222 a. It was also the crest of the 
Earls of Abundel. 

The Centaur, or SagittaruUy which was the Device, and has 
been mistaken for the Arms, of King Stephen. 

The Dragon, No. 223, a winged animal, generally with four 
legs and having a tail like that of a serpent. It appears as a 
military ensign in the Bayeux Tapestry, No. 223 a, and is 
common in more recent Heraldry. 

The Gbiffin, or Gryphon, No. 224, PI. XII., combining the 
bodily attributes of the lion and the eagle, is of the same &amp;mily 
with a group of the sculptured figures of Assyria. When in its 
customary attitude, erect and with wings expanded, this monster 
is segreani. A gryphon is the dexter Supporter of the Duke of 
Cleveland, and the sinister Supporter of the Duke of Man- 
chesteb; the Baron Dtnevor has, for his dexter Supporter, a 
gryphon coward — ^that is, having his tail hanging down. The 
gryphon borne by the Marquis of Ormonde is wingless : this 
creature, distinguished in blazon as a Male Gryphon, has two 
horns. 

The Harpy: — Two of these monsters appear supporting his 
shield (quarterly org. and sa.) on a seal of Thomas Hoc, a.d. 
1481. 

r 2 



()8 MISCELLANEOUS CHARGES. 

A Mermaid, No. 225, PI. XII., a Badge of the Berkeleys, was 
the dexter Supporter of Sir Walter Scott ; aud both the sup- 
porters of the Viscount Boyne are also Mermaids. Lord Berke- 
ley, in his fine Brass at Wotton-under-Edge, a.d. 1392, wears a 
CoUar of Mermaids, No. 226 a, over his camail. In St. Alban's 
Abbey there is an early tile charged with a Mermaid. The 
shields of the Baron Lyttleton and Sir G. G. Otway, Bart., are 
supported on each side by a Triton, or Merman, No. 226, PI. XII. 




No. 225 A.— Collar of Mermaids. 

Brass to Thomas, Lord Berkeley, a.d. 1392, Wotton-mider-Edge, 

Gloucestershire. 

The Wyvem, No. 227, may be described as a flying monster 
of the Dragon order, having only two legs and feet ; its Tail is 
said to be nowed. Two Wyvems support the shield of the Earl 
of Eglinton. 

The Unicorn is the well-known dexter Supporter of England. 
See Chap. XIX., Section 3. A pair of Unicorns also support 
the shield of the Duke of Rutland ; No. 227 a, PI. XII. 

A Monster, a compound of a Lion and Fish, or a Sea-Lion, is 
known in the fabulous menagerie of Heraldry. Two of these 
Sea-Lions are Supporters of the Viscount Falmouth. So also are 
the Pegasus, No. 227 b, the winged Horse of Classic antiquity, 
the dexter Supporter of the Baron Berwick ; the Phoenix, No. 
227 c, PI. XII.,' another relic of remote tradition, that sits 
amidst flames, doing duty for a crest above the shield of Sir 
W. B. Johnston ; the Salamander, another inhabitant of flames, 
the Crest of the Earl of Selkirk ; the heraldie Ibex, or Antelope, 
the sinister Supporter of Baron Dunsany ; and certain heraldic 



MISCELLANEOUS CHABOES. 69 

Fcmtiken and Tigen^ and other fierce animals, which breathe 
fire, and have various strange modifications of what nature has 
assigned to their prototypes. I must add to the imaginary 
groups the little MarUel^ when that favourite heraldic bird is 
blazoned without feet, as in No. 216a, PL XL 

A golden Salamander is the Crest of James, Earl Douglas, KG., 
the first Scottish noble who was elected into the Order of the 
Grarter, and who died, a.d. 1483 ; this animal is represented on 
the Garter-Plate of the Earl as breathing flames ; No. 227 d. 




No. 227 D. — ^A Salamander. 
CxeBt of Jamxb, Earl Douglas, K.G., a.d. 1483, from his Garter-Plate. 





No. 239 A.— CHESTER. No. 234.— BLACK PRINCE. No. 239.— LEVX9QN. 



CHAPTER XI. 



MISCELLANEOUS CHARGES. 



PART III.— NATURAL OBJECTS. 



Natural objects of every kind have placed themselves without 
reserve under the orders of the Herald, that they may con- 
tribute to the Charges which he places upon shields, and in any 
other capacity may realize his wishes. 

The Sun, the Moon, and the Stars, appear in Heraldiy. Trees^ 
Plants, and Flowers, in like manner, are constantly to be found 
in the capacity of heraldic Charges and Devices. A few descrip- 
tive terms are peculiarly appropriate to objects of this class. 
Thus : trees, &amp;c., if grown to maturity, are accrued ; if bearing 
fruit or seeds, fructed ; if clothed with leaves, in foliage ; if 
drooping, pendent; if having their roots exposed, eradicated; 
slipped, when irregularly broken or torn off; when cut off, 
cauped; when deprived of their leaves, blasted; and proper^ 
when of their natural aspect and hue. The term barbed de- 
notes the small green leaves, the points of which appear about 
an heraldic rose : and seeded indicates any seed-vessel, or seedB. 



MISCELLANEOUS CUAROES. 71 



CELESTIAL OBJECTS. 



The Sun in Heraldry is generally represented with a human 
face upon its disc and environed with rays, these rays heing 
sometimes alternately straight and wavy. The great celestial 
luminary is blazoned as '* in his splendour," or "in his glory." 
He appears thus in the shield of the Marquess of Lothian; 
and in a Boll of arms of about 1250, (British Museum, Harl. 
MSS. 6589) Jean de la Hat bears, — Arg., the Sun in his vpUn- 
dowr ffu, ; No. 228, Plate XII. In some instances, always to be 
specified, the sun appears as shining from behind a cloud ; or, 
as rising or setting ; or, a ray of the sun is borne alonoj as by 
Baup de la Hay, in the Boll of Henry III., No. 229, PL XII. 

The Moon is in her Con^lemeni, or in Plenitude^ when at the 
full ; she is a Oresceniy when her horns point towards the chief. 
No. 230 ; in Cadency, No. 380, Plate XIII., is the Difference 
of the aeeand son. She is Decrescent, No. 231, PI. XII., when her 
boms point to the sinister. She is Increscent, or in Increment, 
when her horns point to the dexter. No. 232, PL XII., and No. 
428, Plate XXVIII. In the Boll of Henry III., F. db Boun 
bears, — gu., wiihin an orU of marUets, a crescent org,, or erm, ; 
No. 413, PLXLVIIL Wm. de Bythee's shield, represented 
upon the arm of his sculptured effigy (temp. Edw. I.), is charged 
with tiiree crescents; No. 427 a, PL XXXYIII. : see also No. 427 b. 

Stab : — see Mullet and Estaile, in Chap. IX. 

TREES, PLANTS. FRUITS AND FLOWERS. 

The Charges of this class which are generally in use, are the 
following : — 

OinquefaU, or QuintefaU : — a leaf or flower, having five cusps. 
No. 233, PL Xn. : see also PL XXVII. In the early Bolls the 
einquefoU and the stx-foQ are used without any distinction. 

Ears of Barley, Wheat, de. : — ^represented in their natural 
forms. At St. AlbaxTs Abbey, the shield of Abbot John de 



72 MISCELLANEOUS CHARGES. 

Wheathampstede, of the time of Henry VI., displays gtdeSy a 
chevron, between three dusters of as many ears of wheat, or : 
No. 201 A, Plate XV. : also No. 717. 

Feathers : — the Ostrich feather is the one that is usually borne 
as an heraldic device. It sometimes is charged upon shields; 
and it constantly appears as a favourite Badge of the Plan- 
TAOEN^ETS. The shields that are placed about the monument 
of the Black Prince are alternately charged with his arms, and 
with three ostrich feathers upon a s&lt;Me field; No. 234, p. 70. 
Each of these feathers has its quill piercing a small scroll, bear- 
ing the words — Ich dien ; No. 234 a, Plate XII. The ostrich 
feather was habitually used by the Black Prince, as a Badge. 
It appears, with the scroll, upon the seal of Henrt IV., before 
he became sovereign. His son, Henry V., bore a similar badge, 
the feather being carried by a swan (a badge of his mother, Mary 
DE Bohun) in its beak; No. 234b, PI. XII. The ostrich feather 
and scroll have a place also amongst the heraldic insignia of 
Prince Arthur Tudor, a.d. 1502, at Worcester; No. 235. The 
feathers of other birds besides the ostrich sometimes appear in 
early blazonry. Thus, the Crest of Sir Hugh Courten^y, K.G., 
(about A.D. 1365) is formed of a plumage of swan's feathers, in 
three rows, (Garter-Plate). The Crest of Sir Thomas Lovell, 
K.G., (temp. Henry VII.) is composed of a bundle of peacock's 
feaihers ppr,, in the form of a garb, banded gu. ; (Garter-Plate). 
Again, the panach^crest of Lord Ferrers of Chartley, consists 
of peacock's feathers, (Brass, Merevale Abbey, a.d. 1412), No. 
267 A, Plate XXVI. ; and a panache of turkey's feathers is the 
Crest of Sir John Harsyck, (Brass, Southacre, Norfolk), No. 301, 
Plate I. See Chap. XVII., Sect. I. 

Fleur-de-Lys : — this most beautiful and effective Charge, gene- 
rally supposed to be the flower of the Lily, is the ancient 
cognizance of France. In its origin, the Fleur-de-Lys or Fleur- 
de-Luoe, may be a Bebus, signifying the ** Flower of Louis.*' 
Mr. PLANCHfe, (who always speaks with atithority when he dons 



MISCEIrlrAKEOUS CHARGES. 
KATURAlr OBJECTS -HESCBIPTIS^ TERSTS -MODEfij: CADEXCY: 

CHAPTERS xn.xm. jrr hj^n 




}\^\^i X:.: 



MISCELLANEOUS CHARGES. 73 

bis tabard), after stating tbis supposition, adds tbat '* Clomt is 
tbe Frankisb form of tbe modem Louis, tbe C being dropped, 
as in dothaire, LoQiaire, &amp;c." If Clovis bimself bore tbe Flenr- 
de-Lys, tbat fiBimous beraldic Cbarge may bave been assumed by 
tbe Frankisb Prince as Am Bebus, from tbe favourite Clove-pink, 
or gillyflower. Tbe Fleur-de-Lys appears in early Heraldry 
under several modifications of its typical form. It was in 
especial £aivour witb tbe designers of tbe inlaid pavement-tiles 
of tbe Middle Ages; Nos. 236, 236 a, 236 b, Plate XIII. It 
forms one of tbe figures of tbe diaper of tbe sbield of Bobert 
D&amp; Yere, No. 156, Plate YI. ; and it decorates tbe Boyal 
Tressure of Scotland, in tbe sbield placed by Henrt III., or 
Edward I., in Westminster Abbey; No. 103, Plate Y. This 
same figure was known to tbe Eomans ; and it formed tbe orna- 
mental beads of sceptres and pommels of swords from tbe earliest 
period of tbe Frencb monarcby. No. 238, PI. XUI. ; Nos. 237, 
237 A, PL XY. ; tbe former from St George's Cbapel, Windsor, 
and tbe latter from tbe monument of Edward III. at West- 
minster, are beautiful examples of Fleurs-de-Lys. 

Tbe Fleur-de-Lys was first borne on a Eoyal Seal by Louis YII. 
of France, a.d. 1137—1180. Tbe Counter-Seal of tbe Daupbin 
Loais, (afterwards Louis YIII.), attacbed by bim to a deed 
dated Nov. 21, 1216, during tbe time tbat be was in England 
supporting tbe Barons in tbeir resistance to King John, is a 
most interesting early example of a Frencb Boyal Sbield, semee 
de-lya^ No. 238 a, Cbap. XXIY. Edward III. quartered tbe 
Frencb sbield, aemee de-lya, on bis Great Seal and in bis Arms, 
A.D. 1340, No. 536 B, Plate LYIII., and No. 286, &amp;c. ; and in or 
about 1405, Henry IY. reduced tbe number of tbe Fleur-de-Lys 
to tbrec, tbat reduction baving been effected in tbe Frencb Seal 
by Charles Y., aj). 1364—1380, No. 536 d, Plate LVIII. Tbe 
Fleure-de-Lys were removed from tbe Englisb Sbield in 1801. 
In modem Cadency tbe Fleur-de-Lys is tbe mark of tbe sixth 
son ; No. 384, Plate XIII. 



74 MISCELLANEOUS CHARGES. 

This charge is blazoned in the Boll of Henry III. One of 
the early shields in Westminster Abbey is temSe de-lys ; No. 2, 
p. 12. The Flenr-de-Lys is now borne, without any other 
charge, in the shield of the Baron Digbt. See Plates XXVIII., 
XXXIL, and XXXIX. 

Oarbe: — a wheatsheaf, borne in the arms of the Earls of 
Chester, and still apparent in the greater number of the 
shields of the nobility and gentry of the County Palatine of 
Cheshire ; No. 239 b, Plate XII., and 239 a, p. 70 : see also 
No. 466, Plate LI. The Arms of the Prince of Wales, as 
Earl of Chester, are, (»., three garbes or, as No. 239 a. : see 
Chap. XIX., Sect YII. A Garbe is borne in the arms of the 
town of Sheffield, {Sheaf-^M). Garbes, or sheaves, of barley, 
&lt;fec., are also borne as Charges. 

QiUyiflower : — a species of pink, in great favour in the middle ages. 

HtU and HUlock : — ^A green mound. When only one appears, 
the former term is used ; but tJie latter denotes several moundB, 
their exact number to be specified. 

Hurst : — a group of trees. Thus, Elmhurst bears seven elm- 
trees on a mound. 

Le(we8 : — the leaf or leaves, or the branches of any tree or 
plant must be specified and described in the blazon. Hazd- 
leaves are borne by Hazelriog ; Oak-branches by Okstead, No. 
239 A, Plate XII., and Oakbs ; Srawberry^eaoes (or Fraises) by 
Frazer ; Laurd4eaves^ by Levbson, No. 239, p. 70, as., three laurel 
leaiveSf two and one, or, quartered by the Duke of Sutherland ; 
HoUy4eaoes, by Blackwood, Sso. 

PhntarQemda : — the Broom-plant, the famous Badge of the 
Plantagenet family. The pods, with their seeds, as well as 
the leaves and flowers, are represented upon the bronze effigy of 
EiCHARD II. in Westminster Abbey ; No. 240, PL XII. The field 
of the seal of Jaspar Tudor, is sem^e of the PlanichOenista, and 
is another good example of its treatment in heraldic composition. 
•• Archcdogia'' xviii., p. 429 : see also Chap. XIX., Sect IV. 



MISCICLLANEOUS CHARGES. 75 

Pods ofBecms^ de, : — when used as Charges, the pods are open, 
and show their seed. There is a good example in the Brass to 
Walter Pesood, merchant, a.d. 1398, at Boston, in Lincolnshire. 

Rose:— hi Heraldiy, the Rose is represented after the con- 
ventional manner exemplified in No. 385, PL XIII. In some 
few early examples the small inner leaves are omitted, as 
in No. 242, Chap. XIX. When tinctured gulesy the Hose is the 
Badge of the Plantaoenets of the House of Lancaster, the 
Yorkist Bose being argeni, A pleasing example of the heraldic 
Bose with foliage associated with the flower, occurs, carved 
npon an oak bench-end, in the Chancel of Pnlham, in Norfolk ; 
No. 241 A. In some early shields several Boses are blazoned, 
as in No. 393, Plate XXXVIL, by a Berkeley; and in No. 431, 
Plate XXXYIII., by a De Tressel : see also Nos. 388 k and 
388 L, in PL LXXI. Chaplets of Boses also sometimes appear 
in blazon. In Cadency, the Bose is the Difference of the seventh 
son ; No. 385. Occasionally, the Queen of Flowers is in use in 
Heraldry in its natural form and aspect, with stalk, leaves, and 
buds. Such a Bose is the Emblem of England, See Chap. XY II., 
Sect. I. ; and Chap. XIX., Sect. lY. 

Bose-en-SoleU : — the white Bose of the Plantagenets of the 
House of York, surrounded by rays, as of the sun. It was 
assumed by Edward IY., affcer the Battle of Mortimer's Cross, 
Feb. 2nd, 1461; No. 243, and No. 248 a, Plate XIII. The 
Monument of Prince Arthur Tudor, a.d. 1502, at Worcester, 
abounds in fine examples of the heraldic roses of the House of 
York and Lancaster, and also of the Tudors ; as in Nos. 242, 243, 
and 247, Chap. XIX. 

Shamrock: — a trefoil, or three-leaved grass, the Emblem of 
Ireland, It is represented now as growing on the same stalk as 
the Bose and the Thistle. 

Six-foil : — a flower having six leaves or cusps. It is an early 
Chaise. By the French Heralds, at an early period, six-foils 
were blazoned as Angennes ; No. 244, Plate XIII. 



76 MISCELLANEOUS CHARGES. 

Stock ;— the stump of a Tree ; No. 245, PI. XIII. The Rebus 
of Woodstock. 

Teazle : — ^the head or seed-vessel of a species of thistle used in 
oloth manufactures. 

ThMe : — ^the Emblem of ScoUand. It is now represented as 
growing on the same stalk as the Boite and the Shamrock. 

Trefoil : — a flower or leaf, having three cusps. It is generally 
blazoned with a stalk — a trefoil dipped ; No. 246, PI. XIII. 

TudoT'Bose: — ^a combination of the Lancastrian and Yorkist 
Hoses. Sometimes it quarters the two Tinctures, as in No. 241, 
PL XIII. ; and sometimes it has the rose argent charged upon 
the rose gules. Splendid examples of Heraldic Boses occur in 
King's College Chapel, Cambridge, and in Henry YII.'s Chapel, 
Westminster. At King's, the Bose, Fleur-de-Lys, and Port- 
cullis are sculptured with extraordinary boldness, each figure 
being surmounted by a crown, as in No. 248, PI. XIII. 

Various Fruits, Seeds, and Berries are borne as Charges, and 
they are tinctured as well as drawn proper, unless the contrary 
be specified. Thus, Peaches were borne by Sir John Peghie : the 
arms of George Abbot, Archbishop of Canterbury, a.d. 1611-1633, 
are,— ^., a chevron between three pears or (at Canterbury and 
Guildford) ; the three pears are still borne by the Baron Col- 
CHESTER^ three acorns appear in the arms of Sir W. W. Dallinq ; 
three fir-cones in the arms of Sir E. G. Perrott, &amp;c. 




No. 241 A.— Henldic Roee, Pulham Oburch, Norfolk 



evR^oi^r. 





No. 250. 



No, 249. 



^ f f &lt; If 
f f p y 



No. 251. 



CHAPTER XII. 



DBSCRIPTIVE TERMS. 



The DeBcripUve Heraldic Terms that are arranged in alphabetical 
order in this Chapter are of general application. 



Abatement : — any sign of degradation. 

Accosted : — placed side by side. 

Accrued : — grown to matnrity. 

Addorsed: — ^placed back to back; or, pointing or inclining 
backwards. 

AffrowUe : — so placed as to show the full face, or the front of 
any figure or object 

Aj^paumee : — the hand opened and set upright, and presenting 
the palm to view. 

Armed : — ^provided, as a beast or bird of prey is, with the natural 
weapons for defence and offence. 

Armoyee : — chained with a shield of arms. 

Arrondie : — rounded, curved. 

Attired : — ^having AnUers, or such Horns as are natural to all 
animals of the Deer species. 



78 DESCRIPTIVE TERMS. 

Augmented : — ^having Augmentations^ or honourable additioiis 
to Arms. 

Banded .'-—encircled with a band or riband. 

Barbed : — ^having small green leaves, as the heraldic Hose. 

Boitied .'—caparisoned, as a Charger. The Bardings of the 
knightly war-horses were commonly charged with heraldic 
insignia. 

Barruiy, Bamdee^ Burle'e : — ^barry of ten or more pieces. 

Barry : — divided Bar-unse into an even number of parts. 

Barry-Bendy .'-^diyided into an even number of parts, both 
horizontally and diagonally. 

Bar-wise .'—disposed after the manner of a Bar. 

BaUled, or EmbaiUed : — having BatUements^ or bordered after 
the manner of Battlements. 

BatUed'Embaiiled : — having double BaiUlements, or one Battle- 
ment set upon another. 

Beaked : — applied to Birds not of prey, to denote the Tincture 
of their Beaks. 

Belled : — having a Bell or Bells attached. 

Bend-wise .-—disposed after the manner of a Bend. 

Bendy .'-—divided Bend-wise into an even number of parts. 

Bezawlee : — studded with Bezants. 

BUletie .'—studded with Billets. 

Blasted : — deprived of leaves, or withered. 

Bordered : — ^having a border of the same tincture as the field. 
This is an arrangement of common occurrence in continental 
Heraldry; but it is almost, if not altogether, unknown in the 
Heraldry of England. (See Bordure, p. 8.3.) 

Braced^ or Brazed : — interlaced. 

BrettepSe .-—counter-embattled, having Battlements facing both 
ways. 

Cabossed : — when the Head of an animal is borne affrontSe, 
without any part of the neck being seen. 

Cadency .-—see Chapters XV. and XVI. 



DESCRIPTIVE TERMS. 79 

Canioned : — placed between four objects or Chaises : or when 
a single Charge is placed in the first quarter of a shield. 

Cercdiey or Becercdee : — curling at the extremities. 

Charged : — ^placed or borne upon the field of a Shield, Banner, 
Ordinary, or any other object. 

Chausse : — ^wearing shoes. 

Cheek^y or Cheqtiie: — a Field covered with small squares 
alternating of two Tinctures, there being more than two hori- 
zontal rows of such squares ; No. 126, PL lY. The shield of 
^e De Warrenes, still quartered by the Duke of Norfolk, is 
ehequSe orandaz,; Nos. 127 B, 127 o, PI. VI. 

Clenched : — closed, as the Hand may be. 

Clo8e : — when the Wings of a Bird He close to its Bod}'. 

Clouee : — studded or fastened with nails. 

Combatant : — as if in the act of fighting. 

Company^ ConvponSe, or Gcbony :— a series of small squares of two 
alternating Tinctures, arranged in a single row; No. 124, PL IV. 

Con^paundmg Arms : — see Chap. XIV. 

Conjoined : — united and joined together. 

Conjoined in Lwre: — ^two wings joined together with their 
tips downwards, as borne by the Seymours. 

CowUmm^: — sitting, standing, or moving, with the Face to 
the Sinister. 

CoUsed : — placed between two Cotises, 

Couehant : — ^lying down. 

Conehee: — ^when a shield is suspended dis^onally from the 
sinister chief angle ; as in No. 626, PL LXVI. 

Counter : — ^reversed. 

Counter-Changed: — ^having a reciprocal interchange of Tinc- 
tures : see Chap. VIII. 

CowUer-Componee : — having a Double Componee, 

Counter-Embatiled .-—having reversed Battlements. 

Counter-Embowed : — ^bent with the Elbow to the Sinister ; or 
bent in reversed directions. 



80 DESCRIITIVK TUKMS. 

OottiUer-Fleurie : — when a pair or several pairs of Fleurs-de-lys 
are set opposite to each other. 

CaurUer-PoMafU : — walking in opposite directions. 

CoufUer-SaliefU : — leaping in opposite directions. 

CowfUer-Vair : — a variety of Vcdr, in which the bells are 
arranged base to base ; No. 30, p. 20. 

Cauped: — cut off smoothly as by a sharp instrument, and 
bounded by a right line. It is the converse to Erased. 

Churant : — ^running. 

Covert : — partly covered. 

Coward, or Cowed : — when an animal has its tail between its 
legs, and in various ways indicates terror. 

CrampeUee : — ornamented, as the scabbard of a sword is at its 
extremity. 

OrendUe: — embattled; the open spaces are the CreneUee, or 
EmbnuwreSy and the masses which rise alternately between them 
are Merlons. 

Crested : — Shaving a Crest, as a bird has a crest of feathers. 

Crtned : — having hair or a mane. 

CrusUy^ or OrusUSe : — semSe of Grosses-Crosslets. If any other 
form of Cross is introduced, ita distinctive character must be 
specified. 

DancetiSe : — deeply indented. 

Debndsed: — when an Ordinary rests upon an Animal, or 
another Ordinary. 

Decked : — adorned. 

Degreed, or Degraded : — ^placed upon Steps. 

Demenibred, or Dismembered: — cut into several pieces, but 
without having the severed fragments disarranged. 

Demi : — ^the Half. The vpper or firotU Half is always under- 
stood, unless the oontraxy be stated. 

Developed : — ^fuUy displayed, as a Flag. 

Diapered .—see Chap. VIII., and Plates VI., VII. 



DESCRIPTIVE TERMS. 81 

Dimidiaied : — cut in halves, and one half retnoved. See Chap. 
XIV. 

Disdoaed: — ^having the Wings expanded — applied to all Birdn 
that are not Birds of prey. 

Displayed : — ^having the wings expanded — applied to all Birds 
of prey. 

Disponed : — arranged. 

DomuaU : — ^in the attitude and act of sleeping. 

DoMe-lele : — Shaving two Heads. 

Double-gueuey or Queue-fourchSe : — ^having ttoo Tails, as in the 
case of some lions. 

DavetaU : — a system of CowUer^wedging. 

EmbatOed :—hatUed. 

Bmibowed : — ^bent, with the Elbow to the Deader : arched&lt; 

Embrued : — stained with Blood. 

EnJUed : — thrust through with a Sword. 

EngouUe : — ^pierced through the Mouth. 

Engrailed : — ^having an arched border line, the small contiguous 
arches being concave : it is the converse to Inveded ; No. 1 7 a, p. 18. 

Enhanced .-—raised towards the chief. Thus, the Baron Byko.v 
bears, — ot*^., ihree Bendlets enhanced gu. ; Ko. 249, p. 76. 

Enaigned :— adoined, bearing insignia of honour. 

EnvircnnUy and Enveloped : — snrrounded. 

Equipped : — ^fully caparisoned and provided. 

Eradicated : — torn up by the Boots. 

Erased: — ^tom off roughly, so that the severed parts have 
jagged edges. It is the converse to Couped. 

Erect : — set upright in a vertical position. 

False : — voided. Thus, an Orle is blazoned as a '* false es- 
cutcheon," by the early Heralds. 

Fesse-wise : — disposed after the manner of a Fesse. 

Figured : — when an object, as the Sun*s Disc, is ciiarged with 
a representation of a human face. 

Fimbriated .-—having a narrow border. 



84 DESCRIPTIVE TERMS. 

Incensed : — ^having Fire issuing from the Mouth and Ears. 

Increment, or Increecent : — a New Moon, having its Horns 
towards the Deacter. 

Indented ."—having a serrated border line. 

Inflamed : — burning in Flames. 

In Bend : — set Bend-wise. 

In Chevron : — set in the form of a Chevron. 

In Chief :^mt in the Chief of the Shield. 

In Cross : — set in the form of a Cross. 

In Fesse : — set Fesse-vnse. 

In Foliage : — a Plant or Tree bearing Leaves. 

In Qlory : — the Sun surrounded by rays. 

In Lure : — two Wings conjoined, with their tips in Base. 

In Pale .-—set Pale- wise. 

In PUe : — set after the form of a Pile. 

In Pride : — when a Peacock or other Bird has its tail displayed. 

In Quadrangle : — four charges, or four groups of charges, so 
arranged that one charge or one group is placed in each quarter 
of a Shield. 

In SaUire : — set after the form of a Saltire. 

In Splendour : — ^the same aa In Olory. 

Interkused : — linked together. 

Invected : — ^having an arched border line, the small contiguous 
arches being convex : it is the converse to Engrailed ; No. 17 b, 
p. 18. 

Inverted : — reversed. 

Irradiated : — illuminated or decorated with Bays or Beams of 
Light. 

Issuant : — proceeding from or out of. 

Jessant : — shooting forth, as Plants do out of the Earth. 

Jessant-4e4ys .-—when a Fleur-de-lys issues from any object. 

Jessed : — having straps, as a Hawk in Falconry. 

Jowlopped : — having OiUs, as a Game-cock. 

Laminated^ or Sealed : — having scales. 



DESCRIPTIVE TERMS. 85 

Langued : — applied to denote the Tinctare of the Tongue of anj 
creature. 

Legged^ or Membered : — ^to denote the Legs of Birds. 

Lined : — ^having an inside Lining : also to denote having Cords 
or Chains attached. 

Lodged : — when an Animal of the Chase is at rest. 

Lozengy^ LozengSe : — divided into Lozenges, 

Maned : — having a Mane, as a Lion, a Horse, &amp;o, 

ManteUe ;--a shield divided, as in No. 252, PI. XIII. 

Masoned : — made to represent Masonry or Brickwork. 

Membered : — to denote the Beak and Legs of any Bird. 

Mounted : — applied to a Horse when carrying a Bider. 

MuraiUee: — see WaUed. 

Naiani : — ^when a Fish swims in Fesse. 

Naissani: — the same as Issuani, but applied only to living 
Creatures. 

NebuUe : — having a peculiar wavy border line ; No. 17, d. 

Nerved : — having Fibres^ as Leaves have. 

Nowed : — tied in a Knot. 

Oppressed : — ^the same as Debruised. 

Over aUj or 8wr le tout : — when one Charge is borne over aU 
otiiers. 

Overt : — ^having the Wings expanded for flight. 

Fdt&amp;vnsey or In Fale : — placed or arranged after the manner 
of a Fale; that is, set in a verticcd position, or arranged vertically 
one above another. 

Paly : — divided Fale^wise into an even number of Parts. 

Fdly Bendy : — divided evenly both Fale-wise and Bend-wise. 

Party, or Farted : — divided after an heraldic manner. 

Faseuant : — grazing. 

Passant : — ^walking. 

Passant Ouardant: — walking, with the Face ajffrontee. A 
Lion passant guardant was distinguished by the early French 
Heralds, as a Leopard or a Lion Leoparde, 

Passant Beguardant : — walking, and looking back. 



86 DBSCRIPTIVE TlilUMB. 

Pa89€Mt BepanarU : — the same as Ckrnnter Passant ; that is, when 
one animal is passarU to the dexter^ and another to the sinister. 

Patouce : — ^a very beautiful form of Cross ; No. 77, PL III. 

PeUettSe .-—studded with PeOeU. 

Pendent : — drooping. 

Per : — by means of. 

Pierced .-—perforated, so as to show either the Field, or some 
different Tincture through the aperture. 

PUy : — divided PHe-unse. 

PUy Bendy : — divided both PUe^wise and Bend^wise, 

Phttee .-—studded with PlaUs. 

PomeUed : — to denote the Tincture of the uppermost part of 
a sword-hilt. 

Powdered, PoudrSe : — semSe of small objects. 

Preying .-—when a Beast devours its Prey : see IVuMtii^. 

Purfled : — Alined, guarded, or bordered ¥dth Fur. 

Quarterly : — divided into four Quarters ; also divided into mare 
than four sections, in which case the number is to be specified in 
the Blazon, as Quarterly ofsixy of eighty &amp;c, 

Queue-FourchSe : — see Double-queue, 

Quilled : — to denote the Tincture of the Quills of Feathers. 

Badiant^ or BayonnSe .-—encircled with Bays. 

Baguly, or BagulSe : — serrated, as in No. 17, h. 

BampoMt, and Bampani Sefant : — see Chap. X., " Heraldry of 
the Lion." 

Basee : — erased. 

BdnUed : — broken off, cut short, or recessed. 

Beflected, or Beflexed : — bent, curved, or carried backwards. 

Beguardant : — looking backwards. 

Bemoved ;^-out of its proper position. 

Betorted : — intertwined frette-wise. 

Bising, or Boussant : — about to take wing. 

Bampu : — ^broken or interrupted. 

Salient : — leaping or bounding. 

SaUire-wise ;— divided or arranged per Sallire, 



DESCRIPTIVE TERMS. 87 

Sans : — ^without ; as Sans nombre, to imply that a charge is re- 
peated many times, without the precise number of the repetitions 
being specified. 

SareeHie : — cut through the middle. 

ScnUiHant : — sparkling, or emitting Sparks. 

Seeded : — ^bearing Seeds or Seed-vessels, 

SegreatU : — when a 6ri£Sn or Wyvem is erect with expanded 
wings. 

S(^ani : — sitting. 

Sejani Addorsed : — sitting back to back. 

SemSe : — strewed, or scattered over with any Charge or Object. 
See p. 11, and see also Powdered. 

Shafted : — to denote the Shaft of a Spear, Arrow, &amp;c. 

Slipped : — when a Leaf, Twig, Branch, or Flower is torn from 
off the parent stem. 

Soaring : — ^flying aloft. 

Springing : — Salient^ also bsuant. 

Statant ;— the ordinary attitude in which an animal '* stands 
at ease." 

Stringed : — having Strings, as a Harp ; or, being suspended by a 
Cord, as a Bugle-Horn ; or, being in any way attached to a 'String, 
oxfasUfned by one. 

Subverted :— reversed. 

SurrMwnied : — when one Charge is placed over another. 

Sur4out, Sur le Umt .'—surmowUedy or over aU. 

Sustained, Soulennee: — having a narrow lower border; as, a 
Chief gu. sustained or^ woiQd be a red Chief having a narrow lower 
border of gold. 

TasseUed : — adorned with Tassds, as the cushions below the 
heads of Monumental EfSgies. 

Tiered .-—divided into (hree equal parts. 

Torqued : — wreathed. 

ToumSe : — ^the same as Beguardant. 

Towered : — crowned with Towers or Turrets. 

Transfixed : — pierced thiough, or Transpierced. 



88 DESCRIPTIVl!: TERMS. 

TrafufluerU : — flowing through. 

Transmuted : — comUerchanged. 

Transposed: — having the original or natural position or ar- 
rangement reversed. 

Traversed : — facing to the Sinister. 

TreflSe :— sem^e of Trefoils, or bordered, or otherwise adorned 
with them. 

Tricked .'—sketched in outline with pen and ink. 

Tricarporated : — ^having three bodies united to a single head, 
from which, as a centre, the bodies radiate at equal distances. 
A tricorporate iion appears on a seal of Edmond, First Earl of 
Lancaster, A. D. 1250. 

Tripping^ or Trippant : — applied to Animals of the Chase^ when 
in easy motion, No. 203, Fl. XI., and corresponding wiih Passani. 
When moving more rapidly, such animals are at speed, Counter- 
Tripping implies that two or more animals of the chase are 
tripping past each other in opposite directions, 

TronanSe : — cut to pieces, the pieces standing separately, but 
retaining in their arrangement the original figure or contour of 
the Charge: as in the instance of the Saltire in No. 253, 
PI. XIII. 

Trunked : — ^having a Stem or 2Vtmib, as a Tree. 

Trussed : — ^having the wings closed. 

Trussing : — devouring, as a Bird of Prey does : see Preying, 

Turretted : — crowned with Turrets. 

Tusked : — having Tusks. 

Uwibrated, or Adumbrated : — shadowed, or under Shadow. 

UndSe, or Undy : — ^wavy. 

Unguled : — ^having Hoofs. 

Urinant : — when a Fish swims pale-wise with its Head to the 
Base, the reverse of Hauriant. 

VerdSe, or Verday : — charged with any Plants. 

Verted, or Beverted :— the same as Flexed and Befleoced. 

VerveUedy or VarveUed .-—having small rings attached. 

Vested : — ^habited, clothed. 



DESCRIPTIVE TERMS. 



89 



VigtlarU : — on the watqh for prey. 
Voided : — ^having the entire central area removed. 
VolafU .'—flying. 
VoranU : — devonring. 

Vulned : — wounded, so that the blood is dropping. 
WaUed, MuraUde : — covered wiih a representation of Jfommry. 
WatUed .-—having a Comb and OtUs, as a Cock and a Codcatrice. 
Wavy : — having an nndnlated border line. 
Winged: — provided with Wings, 

Wreathed : — ^adomed with a Wreath, or twisted in the form of a 
Wreath or Garland. 

rr 




Ko. 200. — Sliield of William Lonoespee, Earl of Sausbubt. Died 
A.D. 1226. From his Effigy in Salisbury Cathedral. See p. 60. 



A.D. HOT. 



A.D. 1554. 



A.D. 1631. 




No. 309.— Mitres. 



CHAPTER XIII. 



MISCELLANEOUS NAMES AND TITLES NOT INCLUDED UNDER THE 
TERM "CHARGES." 

The important Group of Heraldio Terms that constitute the 
contents of the present Chapter, are arranged in the same 
Alphabetical Order that obtains in Chapters IX., X., XI., and 
XII. 

Abatement: — a sign of Degradation: see Chap. XXVUI., 
Sect. 2. 

Abeyance .-—denotes that condition in the descent of a Peer- 
age, in which it is vested in two or more Coheirs, both or all 
of them having precisely the same claim ; and consequently, 
since the Peerage can descend only in such a manner as to be 
held by one person, when there are several equal Claimants 
none of them can maintain any claim. This state of things 
continues, unlU aU the original Co-heirs but one fail, and then the 
Representative of that one becomes the true Heir and inherits 
the Peerage. Thus, the Peerage that is in Abeyance is dormant 
only, and not dead, since it revives at once when the Abeyance 
ceases to affect it. 



MISCELLANEOUS NAMES AND TITLES. 91 

Achieoemefd of Amu .-—a complete heraldic Composition, in 
whicli the Shield exhibits all its Quarterings, and its Impale- 
ment, together with its external accessories of Coronet, Sup- 
porters, Crests, Motto, &lt;Ssc. Any complete heraldic Composition 
may be entitled an Achievement of Arms. 

Archbishop ;— the highest Order in the English Church. The 
Archbishop of Canterbury ia the first subject of the reahn, next to 
the Princes of the Blood Boyal. He is the '* Most Beverend 
Father in God," is Archbishop " by Divine Providence," and is 
styled *' Your Grace." The Lord High Chancellor ranks next 
to the Archbishop of Canterbury, and then follows in the order 
of precedence the Archbishop of York : he is '* by Divine Permia- 
sion," his style in all other respects being the same as his Grace 
of Canterbury. Of the two Irish Archbishops of Armagh and 
Dublin, the former is the Primate: their Graces rank imme- 
diately after the Archbishop of York. The wives of Archbishops 
and Bishops have no title, and take no rank &amp;om their husbands. 
See Pall and Pasioral Staff, in Chap. IX. ; and Bishfip and MUre 
in Chap. Xin. 

Argent : — the Metal Silver, 

Armory : — the Herald's Science and Art, which is more gene- 
rally entitled and recognized as Heraldry. Also, a List of 
Names and Titles, to which their several Arms are attached and 
blazoned. See Ordinary. 

Arms : — an heraldic composition, complete in itself, and now 
generally borne upon a shield. 

Arms of Dominion: — the armorial insignia of a Sovereign 
Begnant, borne by him or her in right of the regal office and 
rank, and as the s}anbols of supreme authority and power. Such 
arms are also, by custom, held to be the arms of the country 
and the nation, as well as of the Sovereign. True Heraldry 
distinguishes these arms of Dominion from all other armorial 
ensigns, and it restricts them absolutely to the successive 
occupants of the throne. Thus, the Boyal Arms are not to be 



92 MISCELLANEOUS NAMES AND TITLES. 

borne withaiU Difference^ even by the nearest relatives of the 
Sovereign; and no person whatever can rightly quarter these 
arms without some mark of Cadency. Princesses, indeed, fre- 
quently bear their paternal arms with no other Difference than 
a lozenge instead of a shield, and their own Coronet in place of 
the Crown ; and this is a sufficient distinction while Princesses 
remain unmarried ; as it is also sufficient that they should place 
their arms in the sinister half of a shield, in impalement with 
the arms of their husbands when they marry. In this manner, 
the arms of the sons and daughters of Edward III. are blazoned 
upon his monument in Westminster Abbey : the shield of each 
of the Princes, his sons, has its own proper Label for Differ- 
ence ; but the Princesses, the daughters of the King, have their 
arms impaled by the arms of their husbands, with no other 
difference than their position in the sinister halves of the shields. 
In our own times, Labels charged with distinct marks of Cadency 
have been assigned to the Princesses, as well as to the Princes 
of the Boyal Family : see Chap. XIX., Section 7 ; see, also, 
PL XXXVI. 

Armes ParlafUea :—eucYi armorial devices and compositions 
as fall under the definition of a Bebus. This is a modem dis- 
tinction ; and it does not indicate any profound appreciation of 
early Heraldry on the part of those who introduced and adopted 
it Allusive or Canting Arms abound in early Heraldry ; and 
if it were possible to trace every early shield to its actual 
origin, it would very probably be discovered that in some 
degree or in some circumstance aU arms were Armes Parlantes. 
See jBe6tw, in this same Chapter. 

Attainder: — absolute deprivation of every civil right and 
privilege, involving a transmission of the same fearful penalty, 
and a consequent forfeiture even of pure blood and descent, as 
well as of all hereditary claims. It was the weapon with which 
Treason, or what passed for Treason, used to be smitten down. 
Attainder required a Special Act of the Legislature, and it 



MISCELLANEOUS NAMES AND TITLES. 93 

held in foroe tintil reyoked by the same process and authority. 
The effect, indeed, of the Act or ** Bill of Attainder," was to 
place the accused person, without hied, in the position of a 
criminal who had been tried upon the Charge of Treason, and 
convicted upon regular evidence. 

Auffmentation : — an honourable addition to an heraldic Com- 
position, which is distinct and complete in itself, and conveys 
emphatically a definite signification of its own: such as the 
Union Device of the United Kingdom^ added as an '* Augmenta- 
tion of Honour" to the Arms of the Duke of Wellinqton; 
see No. 614, Chap. XXVIII., Sect 1. Complicated Augmenta- 
tions, which assumed the condition of a series of quarterings, 
were granted by Hensy YIII. to his successive Consorts, for 
the purpose rather of heraldic display than of significant dis- 
tinction, thus most seriously affecting the historic truthfulness 
and the index)endent authority of Heraldry in England: see 
Chap. XIX., Sect. 5. 

Jbnure : — ^the Colour Blue, 

Badge .'-^BXi heraldic Device, having a distinctive significa- 
tion of its own, and borne alone without being charged upon a 
Shield ; see Chap. XVII., Sect 1. 

Banner: — a Square Flag, emblazoned in the middle ages 
with a complete Coat of Arms, which was the distinctive Ensign 
of a Knight-Banneret, and also of the higher Orders of Military 
Chi6&amp;. The BM of Caerlaverock gives the Blazon of the 
Banners of the Princes, Nobles and Knights who were present 
at the Si^e of that Border Stronghold in the year 1^00, under 
the Royal Banner of Edward I. This term ought to be re- 
tained and used by us for the '' Standards " of our Cavalry, and 
for the Flag that we style " the Royal Standard," which really 
IS the " Royal Banner :" see Chap. XVIII. 

Banneret, or Knight-Banneret : — a knight, who, for good 
service under the Royal Banner, was advanced by the King to 
a higher Order of Knighthood on the Field of Battle. From 



94 MISCELLANEOUS NAMES AND TITLES. 

that time he would be entitled to bear, and would be distin- 
guished by a Banner instead of a Pennon. 

Baron: — a Htuiband, the Wife in Heraldry being styled 
Femfne. 

Baron: — a Title and Bank of Nobility derived from the 
early days of English History, and in a peculiar manner asso- 
ciated with the memories of the olden time. It corresponds 
with the Huine of the Anglo-Saxons. 

A Baron now holds the lowest Rank in the British Peerage. 
He is styled " My Lord," and is " Right Honourable." The 
Coronet of a Baron has nx large Pearls, set separately upon a 
jewelled Circlet of gold, of which number /bur only are apparent 
in representations. The Cap is of Crimson Yelyet, guarded 
with Ermine, and is surmounted by a gold Tassel. This 
Coronet, No. 254, was first granted by Coarles II., before 




No. 254. 

whose time the Barons wore plain golden Circles. The Mantle, 
or Robe of State, is Scarlet, and has two Doublings of Ermine. 
See Coronet, and PL LXIV. 

Baroness : — the wife of a Baron. She is styled " My Lady," 
and is " Right Honourable." Her Coronet is the same as that 
of her Husband. 

Baronet: — an hereditary Rank, lower than the Peerage, in- 
stituted by James I., a.d. 1612. Baronets, as originally 
created, were either " of Ulster," or " of Nova Scotia." 

The armorial Ensign of the former is the Badge of Ulster, — 
arg,, a sinister hand, cmiped at the mist and appaumSe gu.. No. 177, 



MISCELLANEOUS NAMES AND TITLES. 95 

PI. IX., borne generally upon a small Shield of Pretence. The 
Scottifih Baronets of Nova Scotia were authorized to augment 
their own Arms, either on a canton or in an inescutoheon at 
their pleasure, with the Arms of that ProTince,— ^r&lt;7., on a wHUre 
az.j (he Boyai Arm$ of Scotland, Supporters .* Dexter, — ihe Unicom 
of Scotland; Sinister, — a saoage Man ppr, ; Crest, — two hands con^ 
joined^ the one ndked^ the other armed in nuifZ, a laurtl-hranch and a 
MiUe issuing hehoeen Aem; Motto, — ''JMtinil hcBC^ et altera tfindt** 
In practice, the external accessories were and are generally 
omitted. By a grant from Charles I. the Nova Scotia Baronets 
are entitled to wear upon an oval Badge, pendent from an orange 
ribbon, the Arms of Nova Scotia (as above), without the Sup- 
porters or Crest, the Badge itself being ensigned with an Impe- 
rial Crown, and encircled with the Motto, — ^** Fax meniis honesUz 
gloriaJ" All Baronets now are '* of the United Kingdom." 

Basinet: — a Close-fitting steel covering for the head. See 
Hdm. 

Bath, Order ofihe:-^eee Chap. XX. 

Bath : — see Herald. 

Bearing: — any heraldic Device or Figure, or a complete 
Coat of Arms. 

Bishop : — the Bishops in number are twenty-one for England, 
four for Wales, ten for Ireland, one for Sodor and Man, and 
forty for the Colonies. The Bishops of England and Wales 
are all Peebs SpiBrruAL of Parliament, except always the 
Biflhop last conaecrated. Also the Irish Prelates are Spiritual 
Peers alternately, four in each session of Parliament. The 
Bishop of London is always a Privy-Councillor, and therefore 
is " Right Honourable." He has precedence of all his Brethren. 
Next in Order are the Bishops of Durham and Winchester. 
The others rank according to seniority of Consecration. All 
the Bishops are ''Right Reverend Fathers in God," and 
Bishops " by Divine Permission." They are styled : " My Lord 
Bishop." 



96 MISCELLANBOUS NAMB3 AND TITLES. 

Archbishops and Bishops impale their own Arms with the 
Arms of their See, the latter being placed to the dexter. They 
have no Supporters, Crest, or Motto, but they ensign their 
Shields with their Mitres. The Arms of Canterbury, are: 
Az.y a Orozier or, the Cross-head org,, surmounted by a pall of 
the last, fimbriated and fringed gold, and charged with four 
crosses pateefitehee sa. In No. 265, PL XIY., these Arms impale 
Eempe, gu., three garbs within a bordure engrailed or, for John 
Kempe, Archbishop of Canterbury, Cardinal and Lord High 
Chancellor, who died a.d. 1454. The Arms of the See of 
York, are, Ou,, tvoo keys, in saUire, org. : in chief, a Boyal 
Crown or. The Arms of London are, Qu., two swords, in scdtire, 
org., pommels or: those of Durham are, Az., a Cross cantoning 
four Uoncels rampt. or: and those of Winchester are, — Ou., two 
keys, addorsed, in bend, the uppermost argent, the other or, a sword 
interposed between them, in bend sinister, of the second, hiU and 
pommel gdd. See Mitre, and Pastoral Staff; also see Chap. XXI. 

Blazon and Blazonry: — ^the description and also the repre- 
sentation of any heraldic device, figure, or composition, in 
accordance with the principles and the practice of Heraldry. 

Blue Mantie : — see Herald. 

Cadency : — ^that heraldic distinction of the several members of 
the same family, or of the collateral branches of the same house, 
which is indicated by some Device specially adopted and borne 
for that purpose : see Chapters XY. and XYI. 

Cadet : — ^a junior member or branch of a family. 

Canting Heraldry : — see Armes Parlantes. 

CardinaTs Hat : — is low in the crown, with a broad brim, 
and of a scarlet colour, with two long pendent cords, curiously 
knotted and intertwined and tasselled. It appears above 
certain shields of arms of the mediseval hierarchy. 

Clarenceux : — see Herald. 

Coat of Arms: — a complete and distinctive heraldic composi- 
tion. The expression is evidently derived from the medisaval 



MISCEIflrAXEOUS CHARGES. 

TXAXI3.IATE OBJECTS AKD ANIMATE BEINGS. 

Ci^pi'ER? z. iG. jc yni ixr; 




PloL^e XY 



MISCELLANEOUS NAMES AND TITLES. 97 

usage of embroidering the armorial insignia of a noble or knigbt 
upon the snrcoat, jnpon, or tabard which he wore over hia 
armour. 

CoUar : — an Ornament to be worn about the neck^ and indi- 
cative of certain rank, office, and position. See Chap. XX , 

CcUege of Amu : — see Herald. 

(Maura : — ^Naval and Military Flags. The term is now used, 
not only in a general acceptation, but also specifically to dis- 
tinguish the Flags of the Infantry from those (styled 
f* Standards ") of the Cavaliy. Shakespeare uses the word 
" Colours " to denote Military Flags. See Chap. XVIII. 

Chins: — ^the Heraldry that may be learned from both 
British and Foreign Coins is of the utmost value, since it is 
always historically correct, and moreover it invariably exem- 
plifies contemporary heraldic feeling and usage. See Chap. 
XXIV. 

Compounded Arms: — ^Arms formed by the Combination of 
two or more distinct bearings, in such a manner as to produce 
a single composition. This process has been adopted only in 
rare instances (as in the Union Flag of England, Nos. 63, 64), 
since the introduction of systematic Marshalling by Quartering. 
See Chap. XIV. 

Coronet : — ^the Ensign of Princely and Noble Hank, corre- 
sponding in its own degree with the Crown of a Sovereign 
Regnant. The Coronets of the Peers of England are worn by 
them on the occasion of the Coronation of their Sovereign. 
They all, in comparatively modem times, have been made to 
enclose a Cap of crimson velvet, lined with ermine, and sur- 
mounted by a tassel of rich gold bullion. Coronets, as insignia 
of Nobility, were evidently in general use by the Nobles of 
England in the reign of Edward III., but they did not assume 
their present (or, indeed, any) distinctive characteristics until a 
period much nearer to bur own times. See Pnnce^ Duke, Mar- 
quess, Earl, Viscounty Barony and CresA, in this Chapter. 

\\ 



98 MISCELLANEOUS NAMES AND TITLES. 

The examples of Coronets, lepresented in Nos. 254, 276, 281, 
302, and 317, and also in Nob, 564, 565, and 566, in PL XLL, 
are drawn in accordance with the commonly accepted fonnB of 
these symbols. A more artistic style of design, however, which 
is in better keeping with true heraldic feeling, is beginning to 
prevail in such representations of Coronets as enjoy the highest 
approval. Coronets of this order, based upon the beautiful 
design of the Crown that encircles the head of the effigy of 
Edwasd 11. at Gloucester, No. 550, are sketched in PL LXIY. 

CorUoiae: — a scarf, worn loose and flowing, attached to the. 
helm with the crest, but discontinued after the middle of the 
fourteenth century. A singularly characteristic example occurs 
in the monument of Atmer de Valence, at Westminster ; 
No. 256, PI. XV. 

County or Compte : — ^in Latin, *' Comes,'' a Continental title and 
rank of Nobility, corresponding with that of "Earl." The 
Coronet is set round closely with small pearls, slightly raised, 
and it has no Cap. 

Countess c^ihe title and rank of the Wife of an Earl, and 
also of a Count. An English Coimtess is " Kight Honourable ;" 
she is styled "My Lady;" and her Coronet is the same as 
that of her husband. 

Courtesy, TUles of: — certain nominal degrees of Eank, that 
are conceded by Royal Grace, and sanctioned by prevailing 
usage, to some of the children of the Peers. The term is 
especially applicable to the "Second Titles" of their Fathers, 
that are thus borne by " Courtesy " by the eldest sons of Dukes, 
Marquesses, and Earls. 

Oregt : — a figure or device, independent and complete in 
itself, worn by the Knights of the middle ages upon their 
helms and basinets. Crests are exclusively the heraldic insignia 
of men. See Chap. XVII., Section 2. 

Cre^Ooronet ;— see Chap. XVII., Section 2. 

OrestrWreaOi .-—see Chap. XVIL, Section 2. 



MISCELLANEOUS NAMES AND TITLES. 99 

Oroum.'^ihQ Imperial, of Great Britain. See Chap. XIX., 
Section 6. 

Crowns Foreign : — see Chap. XXXII. 

Oroum : — when borne as a charge, a Crown generally is drawn 
after the form of the crest-coronet. No. 257 A. The arms of 
St. Edmund, one of the most popular national Saints of 
mediaBval England, in the Caerlaverock Boll associated with 
the ensigns of St. George and St. Edward, are, — azure, three 
crowns^ two and one, or; No. 271, PI. XIV. This Shield appears 
on the monimient of Prince Edmond Plantaoenet, of Langley, 
at King*s Langley, in Hertfordshire. Three similar crowns 
on a field gales constitute the arms of the See of Ely. 

Certain varieties and modifications also of ancient Crowns 
are in use as heraldic accessories, and sometimes they are borne 
as charges in modem Heraldry. The Mural Grown, No. 272, 
a circle of gold embattled, is associated with military success 





No. 272. No. 273. 

in si^es: it is borne, as a crest of augmentation, with other 
devices, by Sir Edward Kerrison ; and, as both crest and 
charge, by the Baron Seaton. The Naval Crown, No. 273, 
borne by Earl Nei^on, as a similar crest, and by Sir George 
Parker as a chatge, is formed by the alternate stems and 
masts of ships set upon a golden circle, and significantly de- 
clares its own peculiar meaning. The Croufn VaUary, No. 




No. 274. 




100 MISCELLANEOUS NAMES AND TITLES. 

274, borne with his crest by Sir Matthew Barrinoton, refers 
to the forcing an enemy's entrenched camp, and is formed of 
small palisades placed upon a golden circle. The Badiated or 
Eastern Crown, called also the Antique Crown, No. 275, borne 
as both crest and charge by the Earl of Seafield, the late 
lamented Sir James Outram, and Sir John Lawrence, has 
its rays pointed, in which respect it differs from the heraldic 
Celestial Crownj which has each of its rays charged with a 
star. 

Crazier: — the Cross-headed Pastoral-Staff of an Archbishop, 
which is borne as a Charge in the Anns of the Sees of Canter- 
bury, Armagh, and Dublin. Characteristic examples occur in 
the Brasses to Archbishops De Waldeby, 1397, Westminster, 
No. 160, PI. XV., and Cranley, 1407, New College, Oxfoid; 
PliW in the Brass to Dean Thomas Nelond, Cowfold, 1443. ; and in 
/I|95. the Monument of Archbishop Warham, 1532, at Canterbury. 
'KoCW^VTfiie eflBgy of Archbishop Walter Grey, 1265, in his noble 
Monument at York, has a staff with a crook-head of beau- 
tiful foliage. See Pastardl-Staff, Chap. IX., and No. 159, in 
PL XV. 

Dalmatic : — a robe of state worn by both Sovei-eign Princes 
and by the Mediaaval Hiei-archy. It was also the distinctive 
vestment of a Deacon. It has rather wide sleeves, and it 
hangs loosely about the person, being open at the sides at the 
lower part. It is exemplified in all episcopal eflSgies, and is 
represented immediately below the chesnble. It occurs in 
royal effigies, and is shown most clearly in the effigy of Henry 
IV., at Canterbur}^ 

Diaper : — a surface pattern, which simply imparts a decora- 
tive character, without assuming the distinctive attributes of a 
charge. See Chap. VIII. 

Difference : — a figiire or device introduced into heraldic com- 
positions, for the purpose of distinguishing several persons who 
bear the same arms. See Chapters XV. and XVI. 



MISCELLANEOUS NAMES AND TITLES. 101 

Dimidiation : — the original method of ImpalemetUj efiected 
bj mutuallj dividing the two shields per pale, and by forming 
the compound shield from the union of the Dexier-half of one 
of the divided shields with the Sinister-half of the other. 
See Chap. XIV. 

Dividing Lines: — see Chap. TIL 

Doubling: — the lining of a robe: also any enrichment of a 
robe or mantle by means of ermine or other rich material. 

DiiArc :— next to the Princes and Princesses of the Blood 
Boyal and to the four Archbishops of England and Ireland, 
the highest order and rank of the British Peerage. 

This title was introduced by Edward III., a.d. 1337, when he 
created his son Prince Edward, the Black Prince, Duke of 
Cornwall. The second of the English Dukee was Henry 
Plantagenet, Earl of Lancasteti, Derby, and Leicester, and 
Count of Provence, who was created Duke of Lancaster, a.d. 
1351. A Duke's coronet, as now worn, has eight strawberry- 
leaves of a conventional type, set upon an enriched circle of gold, 
the cap (if a cap be worn) being of crimson velvet, vrith a golden 
tassel and guarded with ermine ; in representations, five only of 
the leaves are shown. No. 276. The opinion is prevalent that 




■g#&amp;#*- 




No. 276. 



this distinctive form of coronet appears for the first time, placed 
upon the basinet of Prince John Plantagenet, of Eltham, Earl 
of Cornwall, in his eflfigy at Westminster, a.d. 1336. That 
there is no foundation for such an origin of the Ducal Coronet 



102 MISCELLANEOUS NAM£S AND TITLES. 

18 evident from the efiOgy itself. The decorations of the head- 
piece and of the rest of the armour are precisely the same, and 
they are also identical with similar decorations that appear in 
other effigies of abont the same date. The basinet of Prince 
John, No. 277, PI. XVI., however, evidently was once encircled 
by a plain narrow fillet, which is not the case in any other 
instance, so far as I am aware. In the effigy at York, of the 
nephew of John of Eltham, Prince William, second son of 
Edward III., who was bom a.d. 1336, and died in childhood, the 
head has the long and flowing hair encircled by a jewelled fillet, 
represented in No. 278. The effigy of the Black Prince him- 
self, A.D. 1376, at Canterbury, exhibits on the basinet what may 
possibly have been the prototype of the Duke's strawberry-leaf 
coronet, No. 279. From the jewelled circle that encompasses 
the basinet there rise sixteen leaves, with a second series of tho 




No. 279 B. 

same number and much smaller size alternating with the larger 
ones. These leaves differ very slightly fh)m those that are 
carved upon the armour of John of Eltham, and they are in 
exact accordance with a favourite form of decorative foliage in 
general use when the effigy was executed. In Nos. 277 a, and 
279 A, PL XVI., I have given enlarged representations of per- 



DUCAL COROiaETS, BASINETS 
&amp; CREST WREATHS. 

CHAPTERS XIV 8r XVII 




. -d- »- A I - 



MISCELLANEOUS NAH£3 AND TITLES. 103 

tions of the basinets of the two Princes, in order to show more 
plainly the details of their enrichment. No. 279 b shows the 
basinet of the Black Prince, with its coronet and oamail, as 
seen from the front Lionel Plantaoenet, Dake of Clarence, 
who died a.d. 1368, in his will bequeathed ^' Two Chlden 
drdeSj* with one of which he states that he himself had been 
^' created a Dnke," while with the other his elder brother, the 
Black Prince, had been " created a Prince." It would seem 
that for a while the coronets of both Dukes and Earls were 
decorated rather after an arbitraiy taste, than in accordance 
with any established rule. Indeed, more than a century after 
the death of the Black Prince, the e£Qgies of John de la 
Pole, K.6., Duke of Suffolk, and his wife Elizabeth Plan- 
TAGENET, sistor of Edward IV., havo Coronets, No. 280, PI. 
Xy I., of Fleurs de lys^ alternating with clusters of three small 
balls. Possibly, the Fleurs de lys here may denote the Lady 
to have been a Princess. See Coronet^ and PI. LXIV. 

The Latin equivalent of Duke is " Dux." A Duke is styled 
•* Your Grace," and he is •• Most Noble ;" all his sons are 
'* Lords," and all his daughters ^* Ladies ;" but his eldest son 
bears his father's " second title," and accordingly he ranks as a 
Marquess, and generally bears that title. See Chap. XXYII. 

The Mantle or parliamentary robe of a Duke is scarlet, and it 
has four doublings of ermine. There are twenty English Duke- 
doms, seven Scottish, and one Irish. 

Ducal Coronet^ or Crest-Coronet : — see Chap. XVII., Section 2. 

Duckess : — ^the wife of a Duke. She is styled " Your Graoe," 
and is '' Most Noble." Her Coronet is the same as that of her 
husband. 

Earl : — a title and rank of Nobility, in Latin ** Comes," now 
the Oiird in the order of the British Peerage, but the highest title 
and rank of the English Nobles **po8t eonqueOum " until the year 
13379 when the Black Prince was created Duke of Cornwall. 
The *' Earl " of England was identical with the *• Compte " or 



104 MlSCELLANfiOUS NAMES AST&gt; TTTLESw 

^' Connt " of Fianoe ; and while Norman-Frencli was in use in 
thiB country, the English "Earls" were styled "Counts" in 
England as well as on the Continent These powerful Barons 
gncceeded to the Humes of the Saxons, their own pecnliar title 
heing of I)anish origin. 

An Earl is •* Right Honourable," and is styled " My Lord." 
His eldest son bears his Other's " second title," and therefore is 
generally styled " Viscount ;" his other sons are " Honourable," 
but all his daughters are " Ladies." See Chap. XXVIl. 




No. 281. 

The Coronet of an Earl has eight lofty rays of gold rising 
from a golden circlet, each of which upon its point supports 
a large pearl ; also between each pair of rays, at their bases, 
there is a golden strawberry-leaf. In representation, five of 
the elevated pearls and four of the leaves are apparent; No. 
281 . The cap is the same as in the other Coronets. The scarlet 
parliamentary robe has three doublings of ermine. See Coronet, 
and No. 281 a, PI. LXIV. 

In the monumental effigies of noble personages which yet 
remain from the middle ages, there are many highly interesting 
examples of the varieties of Coronets worn by the Earls of those 
days and their Countesses, before this Coronet had assumed its 
present definite and fixed character. I must be content to refer 
to a few examples only. The*Crest of Eichard Beauchamp, 
Earl of Warwick, No. 266, PI. XLI., a.d. 1439, in his effigy at 
Warwick, rises from a plain circlet that is surmounted by a 



MISCELLANEOUS NAMES AND TITLES. 106 

# 

series of pearls slightly raised, but without any strawberry- 
leaves. The Earl and Countess of Arundei., at Arundel, 
early in the fifteenth century, have remarkably rich Coronets, 
No. 282 : the Earl's has a series of leaves and of clusters of 




No. 282. — Coronet of Thomas Fitzaian, Earl of Arundel : a.d. 1445. 



three small balls alternating, all of them being equally raised to 
a considerable height ; the Coronet of the Countess differs in 
having the raised groups set alternately with single balls that 
are less elevated. Later in the century, a.d. 1487, another Earl 
and Countess of Arundel have Coronets, No. 283, formed 
entirely of the conventional architectural leaves of the period. 

No. 283. 

Similar leaves, no less than thirteen in number, rise to a slight 
and uniform elevation along the front of the ample Coronet, 
No. 284, PL XLI., of Isabel Plantagenet, Countess of Essex, 
in her Brass at Little Easton in Essex, a«d. 1483. And, once 
more, at Hever in Kent, a.d. 1536, the Brass to Sir T. Boleyn, 
K.6., Earl of Wiltshire and Obmonde, represents the maternal 
grandfather of Queen Elizabeth in the Insignia of the Garter 





106 MISCELLANEOUS NAMES AND TITLES. 

« 

and wearmg a rich Coronet, the circle of which is set with 
small pearls, not raised, and in contact, and so numerous that 
upwards of twenty are displayed ; No. 285, PL XLI. 

Ermine : — 

Ermines : — Heraldic Furs. See Chap. IV. 

Erminoia : — 

Escutcheon : — an Heraldic Shield. See Chap. III. 

Escutcheon of Pretence : — a small Shield charged upon the 
Field of another Shield ; as in Nos. 388 f and 388 a, PI. XXVII. 

Esquire: — a title of honourable distinction, in rank below that 
of Knight Esquires are personal companions and attendants 
of the Knights of the Orders of Knighthood: such are the 
Esquires of the Order of the Bath, who have their stall- 
plates in Westminster Abbey. Amongst other Esquires are 
all attendants upon the Person of the Sovereign: all eldest 
sons of Baronets and Knights : all eldest sons of the younger 
sons of Peers : all persons holding commissions direct from the 
Crown, but not being of rank lower than Captain : all Koyal 
Academicians, and Barristers-at-Law : also all Bachelors of Law 
and Physic and Masters of Arts. See Chap. XXVII. 

Femme: — ^the TFt/e, as distinguished from the Baron her 
Hwhand. 

Fesse-Point : — ^the central point of a Shield. See Chap. III., 
No. 8 M. 

Field: — the surfoce of a Shield or of its Parts, or of any 
Charge or Object 

Furs .-—see Chap. IV. 

Oarter: — the most celebrated Order of European Knight- 
hood. See Chap. XX., Section 7. 

Charter : — eee^Hendd, 

Oarter : — a strap or riband, fastened with a buckle in such a 
manner as to form a circle, and having the end depending. 
Such a Garter may be of any tincture, and it may be assumed 
for the purpose of being charged with any motto. It was known 



SHIEIfDS OP ARMS. 



:hapteps X x: X2,j:v xv&amp;xx*v^ 



DE GE NEVILLE 



TRINITY HOUSE EARL POULETT 












rSUE OF MAN. 



CAVENDISH. 




CAMOYS K G- CAMOY8 MORTIMER 



HENRY V 




poo 


\ 




1/ 


\ 

\ 


— 


'■A 




-V 


/ 




MISCELLANEOUS NAMES AND TITLIS. 107 

to Heialds, and in use as an heraldic device, before the institu- 
tion of the Order. 

The Oarter of the Order is aznre, bordered with gold, and 
having a golden buckle and appendages. In letters of the same 
precious metal it is charged with the motto, — Homi : sorr : qui : 
MAL : T : PENSE. Siucc the year 1350, this Garter has occasiotially 
been placed about the Shield of England, as in No. 286, 
which represents the arms of Edwabd III. as they are blazoned 
upon his monument; the Oarter and Motto, however, are added 
to the shield of arms, for it is a very singular circumstance 
that none of the insignia of the Order appear in the monuments 
of'either Edward III. or the Black Pbincb. The Garter 
of the Order also encircles the shield of arms of every Knight 
of the Order. A shield thus gartered appears in the fine Brass 
to the Baron Camots, K.G., a.d. 1424, at Trotton in Sussex. 
This Brass also exemplifies the heraldic usage which restricts 
the knightly ensign of the Garter to the shield of the Knight 
himself. Accordingly, above the heads of both Lord and Lady 
Camots, on either side of the two compartments of their double 
canopy, are two shields ; of which one is charged with Camots 
only, or, on a chief gu,y three fiaiee, and is gartered. No. 287, 
and the other bears Camots impaling Mortimer, No. 288, 
PI. XIV. The two shields represented in Nob. 287 and 288 
show the relative sizes of the originals. In the effigy of Lord 
Camots, the Garter is adjusted about the left leg, as in No. 
288 A, PI. XLIII. The canopy of the Brass at Constance 
Cathedral to Bobert ECallam, Bishop of Salisbury, a.d. 1417, 
is enriched vdth a gartered shield of the Royal Arms, No. 289» 
PI. XIV.; the Flours de lys are three in number, and the 
shield is enyironed with rays: again, at Magdalene College, 
Oxford, the shield of the Founder, Wiluam de Watnflete, 
Bishop of Winchester, as Prelate of the Garter, is encircled 
by this ensign of the Order. Many admirable examples of 
the adjustment of the insignia of the Garter occur in monu- 



108 MISCELLANEOUS NAMES AND TITLES. 

mental effigies: as in that of Kichard Beauchamp, Earl of 
Warwick, 1439; of Sir R. HARCouRr, at Stanton Haroonrt, 
1471 ; of John de la Pole, Duke of Suffolk, No. 290, PL 
XLIV., at Wingfield, 1431 ; and of Sir Thomas Boletn, at 
Hever, 1536. The Mantle is represented in all these examples, 
except the first. Sir Thomas Boleyn also wears the C!ollar of 
the Order. Sir B. Haroourt wears the Yorkist Collar of the 
Suns and Roses, having the white Lion of the Mortimers as 
a pendent ; No. 291, PI. XLIV. : and, what is remarkable, in 
her effigy, Lady Haroourt wears the Garter of the Order 
buckled about her left ann^ No. 292, precisely as it is worn by 
Her Majesty the Queen. See Chap. XX., Section 7. 

OaHerPkOe ;-Hsee StaU-PlcOe. 

Chnfannon: — a Flag suspended from a transyerse bar 
attached to a staff, and commonly swallow-tailed at the " fly," 
as in No. 293, PL XXIX. 

Gnxnd Quarters : — ^the primary sections of a quartered Shield. 
See Chap. III., No. 16. 

Oides :— the Colour Bed. 

Hatchment :— the Armorial Bearings of a deceased person, 
usually enclosed within a black lozenge-shaped frame, and placed 
upon a house-front. When a Hatchment is erected on the 
death of a HuAand, the DeoBter half of the Field of the Hatch- 
ment itself is Sable, the Sinister being Argent. On the death 
of a Wifcy this order of the Tinctures is reversed. The Whole 
of its Field is Sable, when a Hatchment bears the arms of a 
Widower^ a TFtdoto, or an Unmarried Person. In the blazoning 
of Hatchments all the rules of Marshalling are to be carefully 
observed. The Tinctures, Argent and Sable, of the Field of 
Hatchments will require to be thoughtfully adjusted, when 
there are many quarterings and other heraldic combinations. 
See Chaps. XIV. and XXX. It is customary to place on a 
Hatchment some brief legend of a religious character, in place 
of the Motto of the deceased. 



MISCELLANEOUS NAMES AND TITLES. 109 

Hdm^ Heaume, or Helmet: — ^the defence for the Head. In 
the middle ages, the Knights wore a second Helm of ample 
dimensions and great strength when in actual action, whether 
in the Field or the Lists. This great Helm was commonly 
made to rest npon the shoulders, and was secured to the 
Knight's person by a chain, as in the Brass to Sir B. de Trump- 
INGTON. In monumental efifigies the great Helm frequently 
forms a characteristic pillow for the head of the deceased 
warrior, and it is adorned with its Crest, Wreath^ and MardUng. 
Occajsionally, aft«r the year 1425, the smaUer Helm is similarly 
used, and the effigy has the Head uncovered. Beneath the 
great Helm the head was protected by a Coif of Mailj and 
sometimes also by a species of close-fitting steel cap. A small 
Helm, known as a Bamnet, was introduced early in the four- 
teenth century, from which a Tippet-like defence of Mail, 
called the Camail, hung down and covered the neck and 
shoulders. The Basinet and Gamail of the Black Frincii: are 
shown in No. 279 b, p. 102 ; see also other examples in PI. XYI. 
The Camail was superseded by a Gorget of plate about the 
year 1408. 

Modem Heralds place the Helm, as an accessory, above a 
shield of arms, and they have both introduced fanciful and 
singularly unbecoming forms of Helms, and have adopted ab- 
surdly complicated rules for their disposition. Such rules 
were altogether unknown in the palmy days of early Heraldry, 
and they might be advanti^eously dismissed from the heraldic 
usagep of our own times. No. 264, and Nos. 611, 612 in PI. 
XL v., represent such Helms as might be uniformly introduced 
into all modem Achievements of Arms. No. 264 is the Helm 
of Sir Edward de Thorpe, a.d. 1418, and Nos. 611 and 612 
are severally the Helms of the Black Prince, at Canterbury, 
and of Balph, Lord Bassett, K.G., upon his Garter-Plate. 
See Chap. XYII., Section 2. The rules at present generally 
observed are as follows : The Helm of the Sovereign to be of 



110 



MISCELLANEOUS NAMES AND TITLES. 



Gold, and to stand affirorUSe^ being guarded with nx Bars, No. 
294. The Hehn of Princes and Nobles to be of Silver, decorated 






1 

4 




No. 264.— Helm, Creflt, &amp;c., of Sir E. db Thorpb. 

with Gold; to stand in profile^ and to show five Bars only. 
No. 295. The Helm of Baronets and Knights to be of Steel, 





No. 294. 



No. 295. 



adorned with Silver, and to stand affrorUSe, having the Vizor 
reused and wiihaut Bars, No. 296. The Helm of Esquires and 
Gentlemen to have the Vizor closed, and to stand in profile. No. 
297. 

Heralds: — the Officers who preside over the Modem 



MISCELLANEOUS NAMES AND TITLES. Ill 

Heraldry of England, and who deriye both their titles and 
their official duties from times long passed away, as their 





No. 296. No. 297. 

predecessors of the middle ages were themselves officially 
the descendants and representatives of the Hoyal Messengers 
and Ambassadors of Antiquity. 

The exclusive privilege of deciding officially respecting Eights 
of Arms and Claims for Descent was bestowed upon the Heralds 
by Edward III., and abont the year 1425 they were regularly 
constituted a Cordate Body. Their official residence, situated 
between St. Paul's Cathedral and the Thames, stands upon the 
site of Derby House, which was given to them by Mary and 
Philip, and was afterwards destroyed in the Great Fire. 

The Colleoe of Arms, or Heralds' Colleoe, as at present 
constituted, consists of Three Kings-of-Arms, entitled Oarter, 
Clarenceux, and Norroy ; of these Garter is the Chief^ and 
Clarenceuz and Norroy have jurisdiction severally to the South 
and North of the Trent : of 

Six Heralds, entitled Windior, Chester^ Lancaster, Somerset, 
York, and Biehmond: and of Four Pursuivants, Bouge Croixj 
Bouge Dragon, BUemanlUe^ and PoricuUis. 

There is another Kino-of-Arms, styled Bath, or Olouceater, who 
has not a place in the Heraldic Chapter, whose jurisdiction ex- 
tends to the Principality of Wales. There are also two other 
Heraldic "Kings" — Lord Lyon, for Scotland, and Ulster, for 



112 MISCELLANEOUS NAMES AND TITLES. 

Ireland. The Kings-of-Akms have a Oraum composed of mxUen 
oak leaoes, No. 298, Chap. XXL, set erect upon a golden circle, 
nine of which leayes appear in representations. The Crown 
encloses a Cap of crimson satin tamed up with Ermine, and it 
is surmounted by a golden Tassel ; and on the Circle itself is the 
Legend, Mtaerere met Deua secundum moffnam miserieardiam tuam. 
The Herald Kings also haye their own official Arms, which they 
impale an &amp;e dexter nde with their paternal Arms. See Chap. 
XXL 

The Official Habit of all the Heralds is a Tabard^ or sleeved 
Surooat, upon which the Royal Arms are emblazoned, the 
Blazonry being repeated on the Front, Back, and Sleeves. All 
the Heralds also wear, as part of their Official Insignia, the 
Lancastrian Collar of 88. See Tabard^ in this Chapter, and 
Chap. XX. 

At the Head of the whole Heraldic Brotherhood, having 
his high Commission direct from the Sovereign, is the Eabl 
Marshal of England. This Office is held by the Duke of 
Norfolk, and it is hereditary in his family. The Arms of 
his Grace quarter the hereditary Insignia of Howard, Brother- 
ton, Warren, and Mowbray, and behind the Shield, crossed 
in saltire, are two MarshoTa 8taoe8 or, enamelled at the ends 
8able; No. 229, Chap. XXYII. For the blazon of the 
Arms of the Heralds' College, see Chap. XXI., Section 7, 
and the Example, No. 602, at the commencement of Chap. 
XXVI. The Heralds of Scotland, in addition to the "Lord 
Lyon," are entitled, lalay^ Bothesay^ Marchmontf Albany, Soes 
and Snowdon, with six Pursuivants. 

The present duties of Heralds comprise Grants of Arms; 
the Tracing and Drawing up of Genealogies; the Recording 
Arms and Genealogies in the Kegisters of the Heralds' College ; 
recording the Creation and Succession of Peers and others, 
with all similar matters, including the Direction of Boval 
Pageants and Ceremonials. 



MISCELLANEOUS NAM£S AND TITLES. 113 

Honor Point : — see Chap. III., and No. 8 l. 

HospUaUera : — see Chap. XX. 

lUwninaHon : — ^for a fall and most satisfactory notioe of this 
beautiful Early Art, now happily revived, I must refer to the 
** Manual of Illumination," by my lamented Mend, Mr. J. J. Laing, 
published by Messrs. Winsor and Kewton : see Chap. XXY. 

Impalement : — the vertical division of a Shield into two or 
more equal parts, and the placing two or more distinct Coats 
of Arms severally in those parts. This is the prevailing 
arrangement for uniting the arms of a Husband and a Wife. 
In the Impalement of a Bordure^ that Subordioary now is 
always dimidiated — ^that is, the Bordure does not eoctend to the 
impaled side of the Shield. It is the same also with an impaled 
Tressure, See DimidiaOon, and Chap. XIY. 

Jousts : — tournaments. 

Jupon : — a Short Surcoat fitting the person, without sleeves, 
worn over their armour by the Nobles and Knights of the 
Middle Ages, from about a.d. 1360, to about a.d. 1405. The 
Jupon was generally of rich materials, and emblazoned with 
the heraldic insignia of the wearer; it was also almost in- 
variably invected or jagged at the bottom. Amongst very 
many others, fine examples exist in the Effigies of the Black 
Prince, at Canterbury, and of the Earl of Warwick (a 
Brass, a.d. 1401), at St. Mary's, Warwick. The Surcoats 
represented in the Effigies of John de Hastings, Earl of 
Pembroke, No. 338, PI. XXI., and of Henry Plantagenet, 
Duke of Lancaster, No. 488 a, PI. LXIII., both from the Brass 
at Elsyng in Norfolk, are somewhat longer than the Jupon. 

King-at-Arms : — see Herald, 

Knight: — in Latin, " Eques;" a mounted Warrior, who in 
the Middle Ages was a man of military rank, entitled to bear 
a Pennon and a Shield of Arms^ and farther distinguished by 
his Oolden Spurs, When used alone, the term now denotes a 
rank somewhat resembling that of a Baronet, except in the 

1 



114 MISCELLANEOUS NAMES AND TITLES. 

important particular that it is not hereditary. The Orders of 
Knighihood of our own day, like those of the days of Medinval 
Chivalry, are FraiemUies of Honour : see Chap. XX. 

Kntght-Banneret : — see Banneret, 

Lambrequin : — see Mantling. 

Lists : — enclosed spaces for holding Tournaments. 

Lieery Colours: — colours adopted by certain eminent person- 
ages and flGunilies, for various decorative uses: as, scarlet and 
white^ by the Plantaoenets ; hhe and whiter by the Lancas- 
trians; Uue and crimson, by the House of York; white and 
green, by the Tudors ; gold and scarlet, by the Stuarts, Ac. 

Maintenance, Cap of: — also called a Chapeau of Estate, was 
an early symbol of high Dignity and Bank. It appears sup- 
porting the Crest of the Black Prince at Canterbury, No. 263, 
PI. XXYI. This Cap is still retained in use, and is occa- 
sionally placed beneath modem Crests in place of the customary 
Wreath. In form, the Cap of Maintenance somewhat rosem- 
bles the modem Scottish '* Glengary," but it is made of Crimson 
Velvet, and guarded with Ermine ; No. 133 a, PI. VIIL : see 
also No. 620, PI. XXX.; No. 207, PL XXVL, and Nos. 451, 
521, PI. XLI. : also No. 199 a, p. 62. 

Mantle : — a long and flowing Bobe, worn in the Middle Ages 
over the armour. The Mantle also constitutes an important 
part of the o£Scial Insignia of the Knightly Orders. See Chap. 
XX. In the Middle Ages, Ladies of Bank wore similar 
Mantles, and in many instances they were decorated with 
heraldic charges, in which case the Mantle generally bore either 
the Impaled Arms of the Lady and her Husband, or her Hus- 
band's Arms only. Numerous examples exist in Monumental 
Effigies ; as in the Brass at Enfield, a.d. 1446, to Lady Tiptoft, 
No. 300, PI. XYII. : in this instance, however, the Mantle is 
charged with the impaled arms of the father and the mother of 
the wearer, Edward Baron Cherlton of Powys, and Alianore 
Holland. 



MARSH.^IiliTISrG. 



'H.'.rZZz^ XIV 



TIPTOFT 



POWYS 





Fi.^-zv;: 



rf'j^y :: Lxc.y Tiptoft. -A-itrL the Sir.^iis of 'Piptoft y.JPovys, 
frcuL :ne Brass. AT. 1445. at Zniield, Middlesex. 

STfjpaye '-4-3. 



MISCELLANEOUS NAMES AND TITLES. 115 

Mantling, or Lambrequin : — ^a small Mantle, generally of 
crimson yelvet or silk and lined with ermine, with tasselt&gt;y 
attached to the Basinet or Helm, and hanging down over the 
ahoulders of the wearer. In Heraldry, the Mantling is often 
so adjusted that it forms a background for the Shield and its 
accessories, and thus with them it constitutes an Achievement 
of Arms ; No. 523, Chap. XVII. : or, it simply hangs in such 
a maimer as to cover the back of the Helm, as in No. 301, PI. I., 
the Achieyement of Sir John Habsyck, a.d. 1384, at Southacre, 
Norfolk ; the Arms are, or, a chief dancettSe az. ; and the Crest 
is, a ]^ainache of turkey's feathers sa., rising out of a hoop or : 
see also No. 612, PL XLV., and No. 264, p. 110. Another 
early example of a Mantling appears in the Brass to Sir Hugh 
Hastings, a.d. 1347, at Elsyng, Norfolk. ITie Knightly 
Mantling being necessarily much exposed, was constantly cut 
and torn in the m^l6e ; this is indicated by the jagged edges 
and irregular form given to their Mantlings by Heralds. 

In No. 408, the Mantling of John Daubygne', a.d. 1346, is 
arranged after a peculiarly graceful manner. This example 
illustrates the usage, prevalent in both the fourteenth and fif- 
teenth centuries, of differencing Mantlings with the same Charges 
that mark Cadency in Shields of Arms. This Mantling is 
semie of midlets. See Nos. 405, 406, 407, PI. XXVIII. The 
Mantling of George Plantagenet, E.G., Duke of Clarence, is 
sem^ of the white roses of the House of York, No. 451, PL 
LI. (Garter-Plate). No. 450, also in Plate LI., represents two 
portions of the Mantling of Henry Bourchieb, E.G., Earl of 
Essex, who died in 1483 ; here the crimson mantling itself is 
bSlettSe, or, and the lining is sem^ of small water-hougets, sable ; 
(Garter-Plate, and Brass at Little Easton in Essex). The 
Mantling of John Bourchier, K.G., Lord Bernebs (died 
1449), is also biOetUe, and its lining is semSe alternately of Bour- 
ehier-knots and water Axmgets ; No. 450 a., PL LXV. Sir B. 
Haboourt, K.G.. has his ermine-lined Mantling sem^e of quaire- 

I 2 



116 MISCELLANEOUS NAMES AND TITLES. 

/of?«, (Garter-Plate). The Mantling of Richard Widville, K.G., 
Earl EiYERs, the father-in-law of Edward IV., is aem^ of 
trefoUa; No. 450 b. William, Lord Hastings, K.G. (executed 
by EiCHARD III.) has his Mantling adorned with sprigs of 
flowers: James, Earl Douglas, the first Scottish E.G., has 
both his Mantling and the Cap of Maintenance which sup- 
ports his Crest adorned with slips of leaves and flowers: and 
the Mantling of John, Lord Beaumont, K.G. (a.d. 1397), like 
the field of the Beaumont shield, is semee de lys^ the lining 
being ermine; No. 450 c, PL LXIV. (Garter-Plates). And, 
once more, Henry V., who, as Prince of Wales, above his 
Shield in his Garter-Plate displays Helms and Crowns of both 
France and England, from hia Helm of France has the Mantling ' 
9emee de lys. (Garter-Plate). 

The Mantling of Sir HaoH Courtenay, K.G. (died before 
1370), is a singular variety, being formed of SvxaC9 feaiker^^ 
like his Crest, inverted^ and terminating in two golden tassels ; 
(Garter-Plate). The achievement of Humphrey de Bohun, 
K.G., last Earl of Hereford, who died a.d. 1373, has a good 
example of a plain Mantling lined with ermine. No. 629, PI. 
LXVI. : it must be understood, however, that the Garter-Plates 
which are charged with these achievements of arms were not 
blazoned and fixed in their places in St. George's Chapel until 
several years after the commencement of the second quarter of 
the fifteenth century. 

As a genei*al rule, the Mantling is of the Metal and Colour 
of the arms ; or, if there be more than one metal and colour, 
of those that are of the chief importance. This rule obtains in 
the Heraldry of the Continent. See Chap. XXXII. The 
Mantling may, perhaps, be considered to have been derived 
from the Contoise, worn by the Knights of an earlier period. 
See Contoise : see also Chap. XVII., Section 2. 

JtfargueM: — (sometimes also MargtUs), the Second Order of 
English Nobility, in rank next to that of Duke. The first 



achie\t:mext of arms 

CHAPTER? XJi: ^: :^vii. 




•3i: oi" Hereiorl Y.f.zpx k- ls'irirmpt-i &gt;d AD 1373 
I'^iR cf *]- r^T-^prEale, abc;li J440 ' 



PlivLYVi 



MISCELLANEOUS NAMES AND TITLES. 117 

Marquess in England was Robert de Vere, Earl of Oxford, 
who by Richard II., a.d. 1387, was created Marquess of 
Dublin. This Rank and Title then, with one other exception 
only, lay dormant until the time of Henry VI. A Marquess 
is *• Most Honourable," and is styled ** My Lord Marquess ;** 
his sons are all ^* Lords," and his daughters *' Ladies," his 
eldest son bearing the Second Title of his father. The Coronet 
is a circlet of gold, from which there arise four strawberry- 
leaves and 08 many pearls alternately, all of them being but 
slightly raised, and of equal height ; in representations ttoo of 
the x)earls and three of the leaves are seen, N6. 302 ; also. No. 




No. 302. 

362 A, PI. LXIV. The Cap is the same as in the other Coronets. 
The Mantle of Parliament is Scarlet, and it has three and a half 
doublings of Ermine. The wife of a Marquess is styled a Mar- 
ehioness. See Coronet. 

Marshalling : — the arrangement and a^roupment of Heraldic 
Compositions. See Chap. XIV. 

Medals : — honourable insignia, bestowed for meritorious 
service in the Navy and Army, and also for eminent worth or 
noble conduct of whatever kind. In very rare instances the 
Medal itself has an intrinsic value, but the prevailing usage 
is that the worth of this decoration of Honour should consist 
exclusively in its associations. See Chap. XX., Sections 13, 15, 
and 17. 

Metals : — in Heraldry, Gold, Or, and Silver, Argent. 

Merchants^ Marks: — devices that were adopted, as a species 



118 MISCELLANEOUS NAMES AND TITLES. 

of Mercantile Heraldiy, by the wealthy Merchants of the Middle 
Ages, to whom the use of true heraldic insignia originally was 
not conceded. They repeatedly occur in monumental memo- 
rials, and consist of a monogram of the initials of the Merchant, 
with a compound figure, which is in part a cross, and in part 
is derived from a mast of a ship. These Marks were often 
home on shields, and they may be considered to be the proto- 
types of the Trade Brands and Marks of our own times. The 
Example, No. 303, PI. XIII., is from the Brass to Thomas 
Poumder, a.d. 1525, in the Church of St. Mary Quay, Ipswich. 
In the Brass to William Grevel, a.d. 1401, at Chipping 
Campden, there are both a Merchant's Mark and a Shield of 
Arms, (the shield is represented in No. 396, PL XXXVII.) ; and 
the Brass to John Terrt, a.d. 1524, at St. John's, Maddermarket, 
Norwich, has a shield which quarters the arms of a commercial 
guild with a merchant's mark. 

Merchants of the Staple, — of London and Calais, incorporated 
by Edward III. See Chap. XXI., Section 10. 

Merchants-Adventurers, — of Hamburgh and London, incor- 
porated by Edward I. See Chap. XXI., Section 10. 

MUre: — the Cap of Official Bank and Dignity, placed above 
their Arms, and used as a Badge of their ofSce by the Arch- 
bishops and Bishops of the Church of England and Ireland, but 
worn only by prelates of the Boman Church. Mitres are 
always represented as golden, and they are all cleft from the 
summit downwards, so that they terminate in two points. Two 
InfidoB, or ribbons fringed at the ends, depend from every Mitre. 
Until recent times all Mitres were so far alike that they were 
without any distinction whatever of ecclesiastical rank : thus, 
one of the finest and richest of the existing early examples is 
the Mitre represented in the Brass to Thomas Delamere, Abbot 
of St Alban's (about a.d. 1375), in the Abbey Church of St. 
Alban : see also the examples at the head of this chapter, of 
which the latest is from the monument of Archbishop Samuel 



MISCELLANEOUS NAMES AND TITLES. 



119 



Harsnett, a.d. 1631. The Mitres of Archbishops are now gene- 
rally represented rising from ducal coronets, as in No. 307 ; 
but the Mitres of their Graces and also those of the Bishops 
all rise alike from plain golden circlets, in No. 306. See 
Notes and Queries, 2nd Series, viii., 248, and ix., 67, 188, and 295. 
The Bishops of Durham, as nominally Counts Palatine of the 
County of Durham as well as Bishops of the See, had their 
Mitres rising from a similar Coronet, as in No. 308. Curious 
examples of Mitres with Coronets, Feathers, and Crests, appear 




No. 306. 



No. 307. 




No. 308. 

on the Seals of Thomas de Hatfield, a.d. 1345 ; of John de 
FoRDHAM, 1382; of Robert de Neville, 1438; and of Richard 



120 MISCELLANEOUS NAMES AND TITLES. 

Fox, 1494, all of them Bishops of Durham. (See the Plates in 
SuRTEEs' Hidortf of Durham.) 

In the Middle Ages, Mitres underwent several important 
changes in their contonr and general aspect. At first very 
low, simple, and concave in outline, during the fourteenth 
century they hecame more elevated, rich, and splendid. Still 
later. Mitres changed their contour from concave to convex, 
and were considerably elevated, and thus they assumed their 
present form and character. In Mediaeval Effigies and Seals, 
Mitres are constantly represented with characteristic accuracy. 
In No. 309, at the head of this chapter, I have given outlines 
from some of these examples for the sake of comparison ; they 
are from the Brasses to Archbishop Cbanley, a.d. 1417, at 
Oxford; Bishop Goodryke, a.d. 1554, at Ely; and Archbishop 
HABSNirrT, aj). 1631, at Chigwell, Essex. 

Monogram: — a single initial or other letter, also a combina- 
tion of several initials or letters, so arranged as to form a 
single compound device. A remarkable series of Monograms is 
carved in the bosses of the vaulted ceiling of the Divinity School, 
Oxford. 

Motto : — a word or a brief epigrammatic sentence, supposed 
to be in some manner characteristic of the Bearer, and usually 
placed on a scroll either beneath a shield, '^or about a crest. 
The latter position should be adopted when the Motto has 
evident reference to the crest itself. When no Helm is intro- 
duced, the Motto may be effectively placed between the Shield 
and the Crest. A Motto may abo be charged upon a garter. 
In Heraldry, as a law, a Motto is not held to be hereditary, 
but is supposed to be of a strictly personal character ; in almost 
every instance, however, in actual usage, the Motto is trans- 
mitted and borne with the Shield and Crest. Mottoes are not 
borne by Bishops. See Bebua ; and see Chap. XYIL, Section 6. 

Momd : — see Chap. XIX., Section 6. 

Norroy .-—see Herald, 



MISCELLANEOUS NAMES AND TITLES. 121 

Naoa Seoiia^ Arms of: — see Baronet. 

Or:— the Metal flWd. 

Orders ofKnighihood : — see Chap. XX. 

Ordinary of Arms : — a series of Heraldic Bearings, or Coats 
of Arms, classified and arranged in accordance with the princi- 
pal Charges, and having the names of the Bearers attached. It 
is the reverse of an Armoury, 

Panache: — a Plume of Feathers, generally those of the 
peacock, set vpright, so as to form a Crest. Such a decoration 
for the Helm appears to have been occasionally in use from an 
early period until the concluding quarter of the fifteenth 
century, when waving plumes were first introduced. The 
Panache was almost always regarded as a Crest. It appears 
in the Brass to Lord Ferrers, of Chartley, about a.d. 1410, at 
Merevale, in Warwickshire, No. 267 a, PI. XXYl. ; also, but 
not of peacock's feathers, in the sculptured effigy of Sir T. 
Arderne, a.d. 1400, at Elford, in Staffordshire : and again in 
the Brass to Sir J. Harsyck, a.d. 1384, at Southacre, Norfolk, 
No. 301, PI. I. The Mortimers had for their Crest a 
Panache of many azure feathers, rising from a Crest-Coronet ; 
No. 269, PI. XXVI., and No. 270, Chap. XXIV. Another 
example of a Panache is represented in No. 522, which is the 
Crest of John, Lord Scrope, K.G. See Chap. XXVII., Sec. I. 

Paschal Lamb: — a White Lamb, passant, represented as 
carrying the Bed Cross Banner or Pennon of St. Geoi^e. It 
was a device of the Khighis Templars. 

Pean ;^-an heraldic Fur. See Chap. IV. 

Peer : — ^the general title of the Nobility of Great Britain, in- 
dicating iheir equality of rank as a dass^ as the *' Nobles," dis- 
tinguished from the ** Commons," of the realm. For the 
History, Succession, Honours, Arms, Privileges, &lt;&amp;c., of the Peers, 
I must refer to the *' Peerage^' by Sir Bernard Burke, Ulster 
King at Arms^ published every year, and to the other Peerages. 
Pemian : — a small pointed or swallow-tailed Flag, carried by 



122 MISCELLANEOUS NAMES AND TITLES. 

every mediaeval Knight upon bis own Lance, and which bore 
bis own personal Device. The Pennon appears to have been 
adopted in its distinctive character dnring the reign of Henry 
III. My example, No. 310, PL XXIX., from the Brass to Sir 
John D'Aubebnoun, at Stoke Danbemon, Surrey, is of the 
period of Edwabd I.; it is onire, charged with a chevron and 
fringed or : fee Chap. XVIII. 

PennoneeUe : — a long streamer-like Pennon. 

Plania Oenigta: — ^the Broom-plant, the celebrated Badge of 
the Plantagenet Princes, which was afisumed and borne by Geof- 
frey Plantagenet, Count of Anjou, the Founder of the Plan- 
tagenet Family. In Heraldry, a sprig of the Broom appears 
with its spike-like leaves, its golden blossoms, and its pods, the 
latter sometimes open and disclosing their seeds. The effigy of 
BiCHARD II., at Westminster, has the Dalmatic and Mantle 
diapered with the Plantagenista (No. 240, PI. XII.), and the other 
badges of that nnfortnnate Prince. The pod of the pea-plant 
is used somewhat after a similar manner in the Brass to 
Walter Pesood, Merchant, a.d. 1398, at Boston, in Lincolnshire. 

Pkme : — see Panache. 

PortcuUis : — see Herald ; also see PortcuUis in Chap. IX. 

PoteiU ;— an Heraldic Fur. See Chap. IV. 

Powdering : — scattering irregularly over any field : specially 
applied to small objects. 

Prince and Princess : — see Chap. XIX., Section 6. 

Pwpure : — ^the colour Purple. 

Pursuivant: — a Herald of the lowest rank. For the sake of 
distinction, the Pursuivants wore their Tabards having the 
sleeves hanging in front and behind, not being allowed to wear 
them as the Heralds wore their sleeves. This singular usage is 
distinctly marked in the representation of the Funeral Proces- 
sion of Queen Elizabeth, in the " Vetusta Monwmenta^^ vol. iii., 
Plates XVIII. to XXIV. 

Quartering: — ^the arranging different armorial compositions 



MISCELLANEOUS NAMES AND TITLES. 123 

in those divisions of a shield, which are either four or more than 
four in nnmber. See Chap. XIV. 

Q^artertng8: — quarterly divisions of a shield; also the arms 
emhlazoned upon such divisions. 

Bdms : — a charge or charges, or any heraldic composition 
which has an allusion to the name of the bearer, or to his 
profession, or his personal characteristics, and thus may be 
said to speak to the beholder, '^ non verbis, sed rebus." For 
example, three salmons for the name Salmon; a spear on a 
bend for Shakspeare, &amp;c,, &amp;c. In the Middle Ages, the Bebus 
was a favourite form of heraldic expression, and many quaint 
and curious examples remain of such devices: for instance, 
the monument of Abbot Bamtydge, at St. Alban's, abounds in 
figures of Bamsy each of which has, on a collar about its neck, 
the letters btdge : these Bams, which are sculptured with 
remarkable spirit, support the Shield of Arms of the Abbey of 
St. Alban,-^«., a saUire or; Nos. 623, 711, 712, PI. LXXVIL; 
see also Chap. XVII., Section 3, and Chaps. XXIII. and XXX. 
An AjBhtree growing oidofa Cash or Tun, for the name AshUm, at 
St. John's, Cambridge, is another example of a numerous series. 
The /an, to represent the terminal syllable " ton," was in great 
favour ; see Tan, in Chap. IX. ; thus at Winchester, in the 
Chantry of Bishop Langton, a.d. 150D, a musical note called 
a long is inserted into a &lt;un, for Langton ; a vine and a tun, for 
his See, Winton ; and a hen sitting on a tiwn, for his Prior, 
Hunton. In No. 628, drawn from the panelling of the Chan- 
try of Bishop Otj)HAM, a.d. 1519, in Exeter Cathedral, the 
owl with the label in its beak charged with the letters dom, 
forms what was held to be a Bebus of the Bishop's name — 
OuH-dom, Old-ham. About the same period, in the sculptures 
of Norwich Cathedral, Bishop Walter Lyhart has his Bebus 
many times repeated; it is a stag or hart lying down in a 
conventional representation of water: this is carrying the 
principle of the Bebus about as far as it can be carried. 



124 MISCELLANEOUS NAMES AND TITLFS. 

Another tjurious and characteristic example of a Rebus occurs 
in the monument of Sir John Pech^, at LuUingstone, Kent, 




No. 628. — ^Bebus of Bishop Oldham, Exeter Cathedral. 

A.D. 1522, and also in the stained glass of the chapel in which 
this monument is preserved: the shield of arms of Sir John 
Pech^ (az.j a lion ran^, queue fourchee erm,, croumed or), is sur- 
rounded by branches of Sk pecuh-iree, each pecuA being charged with 
the letter t ; also the crest, a lion'e head crowned^ stands upon a 
wreath of peach-branches fruited^ the peaches charged as before. See 
Stoihard. 

In Westminster Abbey, Abbot Islip's Chapel gives two forms 
of his Bebus ; one, a human Eye, and a small branch or ** Slip " 
of a tree ; the other, a man in the act of falling from a tree, 
and exclaiming, '^ I slip /" Such heraldic puns are distin- 
guished as Canting Heraldry. This system extends to mottoes, 
as in the well-known instance of the Yernons, whose motto is 
** Ver non semper tnret.'* 

This Canting Heraldry, which was carried to so strange an 
excess in the sixteenth century, had a prevailing influence un- 
der a much simpler form of expression with the early Heralds. 
A searching investigation, indeed, of the true origin of the 
surnames of the men who in the thirteenth and fourteenth 
centuries bore arms, would go &amp;r to show that an allusive 
connection between names and arms was so prevalent, as to 
constitute the general rule. Names have undergone many 
changes, partly through translation from their original Norman- 



MISCELLANBOUS NAMES AND TITLES. 125 

French or Latin, partly from a combination of the Latin and 
the Norman-French yersions of the same name, and in part 
from variations of orthography; and the armorial devices and 
compositions having also commonly lost their original Norman- 
French titles and descriptions, the allusive nature of the 
early Heraldry has ceased to he palpable, and therefore has in 
a great measure ceased to he recognized. Tt is of the very 
essence of all Heraldry, however, that in some respect or degree 
it should be allusive — should have in it something of the Rebus ; 
otherwise it would not fulfil its aim and purpose of being a 
symbolical language. A few examples from the early Bolls of 
Arms will suffice to illustrate the manner in which shields of 
arms were Armea Parlanies in the olden time : 

A Cro88 MoUne^ borne by Db Molines, or Molymeux. 

Three Hcmmera, (French JtfoWeQ, by John Martel, and by 
the Hammertons. 

Two Truny^y by De Trumpingdon. 

Horaeshoea, by De Ferrers. 

T^ree human hands, by Tremain. 

Three Boars* heads, by Swyneburne. 

A Hart, by De Hertley. 

A Bear, by Frrz Uese. 

Bams, by Ramsey. 

Three Otters (French, Louires), by Luttrel. 

Martlets, by De Merley. 

Three Baoens, by Corbett. 

TTiree Lucies (Lucy, a pike), by De Lucy. 

Three Laurel Leaves, by Leveson. . 

Three Hedge-Hogs (French, Herrtson), by De Hbt^tz^ or 
Harris. (Example on the shield of an effigy at Gonaldston, 
Notts ; also, as a Badge, in a Brass at Diggeswell, Herts). 

Two Barbels, for De Barre : &amp;c., Ssc. 

Begalia : — the insignia of Royalty. See Chap. XIX. 

BoU of Arms: — an heraldic record with a blazon of Amis, 



12&lt;) MISCELLANEOUS NAMES AND TITLES. 

usually written and illuminated upon a long strip of vellum, 
and rolled up instead of being folded into leaves. The earliest 
English fioUs are of the reign of Henry UI. ; and the earlier of 
these contains almost a complete Baronial Armoury of that pe- 
riod, the shields of arms being two hundred and sixteen in number. 

Bose : — the badge of England. See Bose in Chap. XI. 

Bouge Croix : — see Herald. 

Bouge Dragon : — see Herald, 

Sable : — ^the colour ElacL 

Si. Alban: — ^the English Protomartyr. The arms of the 
fiunous Abbey that bore his name were, az., a taUire or: 
see No. 466, PL LI. A figure supposed to represent St. Alban 
appears in the canopy of the Brass to Abbot Delamere, about 
A.D. 1375, still preserved in the Abbey Church of St. Alban. 

St. Andrew : — ^the Patron Saint of Scotland. His arms are, 
azure, a saUire argent; No. 60, PL IIL 

St, Edmund : — one of the favourite popular Saints of medificval 
England. His arms are, azure, three crowns, two and one, or; 
No. 271, PL XIV. 

St, Edward, or Edward the Confessor : — another popular 
Saint of the olden time. His arms are, aaure, a cross fleurie, 
between five martlets, or. Sometimes the cross is blazoned pa- 
tonce, as in Westminster Abbey ; and sometimes fiewretUe, as in 
the stalls at Luton Church in Bedfordshire. There is a fine 
example of this shield, executed in relief, and diapered, in the 
South Choir Aisle of Westminster Abbey, No. 78, PL I. ; also, 
another fine example at the entrance to Westminster Hall. 
This coat of arms was impaled by Bichard IL, Nos. 349, 350, 
PL XXIIL; No. 636 c, PL LVIH.; and No. 529, PL XXXV.; 
and it was also granted by him to some of his near kinsmen. 
Thus, the arms of the Confessor were granted to Thomas 
Holland, second Earl of Kent and Duke of Subrey, to be 
impaled to the dexter within a bordure ermine; No. 342, PL 
XXII.; to John Holland, K.G., first Duke of Exeter, to be 



MISCELLANEOUS NAMES AND TITLES. 127 

differenced with a label argent, and impaled to the dexter; 
and to Thomas Mowbray, K.G., first Duke of Norfolk, the 
arms of the Confessor were also granted, wUh two ostrich fea^ 
thers erect, the arms to be impaled to the dexter, wUhoui differ- 
ence; Nos. 631, 632, Fl. LXV. Henrt Bolinqbroke assumed 
the arms of the Confessor, and impaled them, differenced 
with a label of three points, to the dexter of his own impaled 
shield ; No. 347, Chap. XIY. It was one of the capital charges 
against the Duke of Norfolk, in 1546, that he had assumed 
this coat of arms. See Chap. XV., Mardeta. 

SL George : — ^the Patron Saint of England. The incident (if 
any) which led to the association of St. George with England 
is unknown. The arms of this illustrious saint are, argent, a 
cross guUs; No. 62, PL lU. I am not able to refer to any 
earlier example of the arms of St. George, as borne by the 
saintly warrior himself, than that which occurs in the Brass to 
Sir Hugh Hastings, at Elsyng, Norfolk, a.d. 1347, No. 311, 
PI. XXIX. In the canopy of this fine Brass, St. , George ap- 
pears mounted and transfixing the Dragon, and he has his 
Cross charged upon his Shield, his Surcoat, and the Bardings 
of his charger. Another small figure of St. George on foot, 
with his shield duly charged, is introduced into the canopy of 
the Brass to Sir Nicholas Hawberk, a.d. 1407, at Cobham, in 
Kent. St George appears upon the Great Seal of Edward in., 
A.D. 1360 : and in the Boll of Caerlaverock, a.d. 1300, the Ban- 
ner of St. George is mentioned, with the Banners of St. 
Edmimd and St. Edward, but these saintly ensigns are not 
blazoned. The arms of St. George are also mentioned in the 
inventory of the Earl of Hereford, a.d. 1322. Each of the 
large shields upon the Monument of Edward m. is charged 
with a Bed Cross, but the field now is or and not argent. In 
illuminations of the fourteenth century, a portraiture of St. 
Geoi^e and the Dragon appears upon some of the standards of 
England. 



p^^^i« 



128 MISCELLANEOUS NAMES AND TITLES. 

St, Miehad: — see Chap. XX., Section 11; also, Chap. XXIV., 
Section 2. 

Si, Pairiek: — ^the Patron Saint of Ireland. His Arms are, 
argent^ a saUire gvies; No. 61, PI. HI. 

Second Tide : — this expression denotes the second in a series 
of dignities, accumulated in the persons of Peers of the 
higher ranks. Thus, each Peer, in addition to the highest 
rank that he holds, and by which he is himself known, also 
generally enjoys the several lower ranks besides : for example, 
— an Earl may be also a Viscount and a Baron; a Marquis 
may also be an Earl, a Viscount, and a Baron; and a Duke 
may hold, with his Dukedom, all the lower grades of the 
peerage. In any such case, the second in the order of these 
lesser titles is conceded '' by courtesy " to the eldest son of either 
a Duke, a Marquis, or an Earl. 

Shamrock : — the badge of Ireland. 

Shidd ;— see Chap. III., also ShiM in Chap. IX. 

SiiUder : — the left side; see No. 8 in Chap. III. 

S»S.y CoOar of: — ^the Badge of the Lancastrian Princes 
and their Friends, Partisans, and Dependents : see Chap. XX., 
Section 5. 

Standard : — a Medinval Flag, apparently introduced during the 
reign of Edward m., which was always of considerable length 
in proportion to its depth, and was made tapering (sometimes 
swallow-tailed), towards the fly. Standards appear to have 
been always large, but their dimensions were determined by 
the rank of the personages by whom they were displayed. The 
devices charged upon early Standards were not determined 
by any heraldic rule ; but it was a prevalent custom to charge 
them with numerous and varied^evices. Edward III. had one 
Standard with figures of St. George and the Dragon; and 
another eemSe of Fleurs-de-lys and Lions, with France and 
England quarterly at its head; No. 312, PI. XXIX. The 
Standard of the Earl of Warwick had the Cross of St. George 



MISCELLANEOUS NAMES AND TITLES. 129 

at tiie head, and was 86mSe with his Badge of the Bear and 
the Ragged Staff; No. 313, PL XXXV. Except when they 
bore Boyal Devices, the English Standards of the Tudor era 
tmiyersally had the Cross of St. Greorge at their head; then 
came the Device, Badge, or Crest of the Owner, with his Motto. 
Standards never bore a regular Coat of Arms. They were dis- 
tributed amongst the Corps of any Baron, Knight, or other 
Commander, and were displayed without a distinctive or special 
signification (as was so emphatically the case with both the 
Pennon and the Banner^) as decorative accessories which might 
enhance *^the pomp and circumstance of War." Examples, 
Nos. 315 and 316, PL XXIX., are two Standards of Henry 
VILL, drawn from the curious picture at Hampton Court, repre- 
senting his embarkation at Dover for France, on the occasion of 
the "Field of the Cloth of Gold.'' Both display the Tudor 
lAvery Colours, argent and vert; one has a Fleur-de-lys charged 
upon these Colours, and the other has the Cross of St. George 
at the Head. In the Funeral Procession of Queen Elizabeth 
there are many curious examples of Tudor Standards : {Vetua. 
Man., iii., 18, &amp;o.) See Chap. XVIII. 

StaU-Plaie :^Sk square or oblong plate of gilt copper, upon 
which the Arms of Knights of the Garter and the Bath are em- 
blazoned, and fixed in their stalls in the Chapels of St. George 
at Windsor, and of Henry VII. at Westminster. The arms 
of the Esquires of the Bath are similarly displayed and re- 
corded in the lower range of Stalls. The StaU-Plates of the 
Garter are amongst the most interesting and valuable of the 
Historical records that the Heraldry of England possesses: 
these Plates are so arranged at Windsor, that the Shields of 
arms on both sides of the Chapel face towards the Stalls of the 
Sovereign and the Prince of Wales at the western extremity 
of the choir ; consequently, the Shields on the Prince's side 
sometimes appear to be reversed. 

It is not known whether Plates with the armorial insignia of 

K 



130 MISCELLANEOUS NAMES AND TITLES. 

the Knights were fixed in the Stalls at Windsor at, or soon 
after the first institution of the Order of the Garter. 
The Plates now in existence cannot be assigned to a period 
earlier than the commencement of the reign of Henrt YI. ; the 
' forms of the helmp, indeed, the adjustment of the mantlings, 
and the drawing of the lions, are conclusive in determining the 
era of the Plates to be that of the fifteenth century. Possibly, 
some of the earliest of the existing Plates may have been copied 
from still earlier records of a similar class; and the earliest 
Shields of arms may have had their blazonry determined by the 
seals and other authoritative heraldic relics of the Personages 
to whom they belong; but this is doubtful, since more than 
one Garter-Plate of the Plantagenet Princes bears France 
modem in the first and fourth quarters, whereas it is certain 
that these Princes themselves in their lifetime quartered 
France ancient. The usage of encircling the Shield with the 
Garter of the Order did not prevail until the reign of Henry 
yn. A most valuable collection of tracings from the Garter 
Plates by Leake [is preserved in the College of Arms ; and 
happily "Garter" is a vigilant observer of the safe keeping 
of the original Plates. 

Star: — an Ensign of Knightly Hank, common to the He- 
raldry of every civilized people. See Chap. XX. 

Star of India .'--Bbe Chap. XX., Section 12. 

Suns and Boeee .'—see Torldtit CoUar. 

Super-Oharge : — one Device or Figure charged upon another. 

Supporter : — a Figure, whether of a human or of an imagi- 
nary being, or of any living creature of whatever kind, which 
stands on one side of a Shield, or sometimes behind it, as if in 
the act of holding the Shield up {supporting it), or guarding it. 
Supporters generally appear in pairs, one to the Dexter and the 
other to the Sinister of the Shield ; in the greater number of 
examples they are both alike, but frequently they are altogether 
distinct from one another, as in the instance of the Royal Sup- 



MISCELLANEOUS NAMES AND TITLES. 181 

porterg of England, the Lion and the Unicom. See SuPFOm'EBs, 
in Chap. XVH., Section 3. 

Sureoat : — a long, loose, and flowing garment of rich mate- 
rials, worn by the early Knights over their armour. It was 
sometimes charged with the armorial insignia of the Wearer, 
as in the Brass at Chartham, in Kent, to Sir Robert De Setyans, 
about A J). 1305. About the year 1325 the Surcoat began to 
be superseded by a singular Garment entitled a Cydaa, which, 
while long and flowing behind, was cut off short in the front 
The Brass to Sir John D'Aubebnoun the younger, a.d. 1327, 
and the sculptured Effigy of Prince John Flantaoenet, of 
Eltham, a.d. 1337, afford admirable examples. About a.d. 1345 
the Gyclas was shortened behind, and about 1355 it was super- 
seded by the Japan. 

Tabard : — the Garment that was worn by the Knights of the 
Tudor Era. When the Jupon ceased to be worn, about a.d. 
1405, the splendid Panoply of Plate Armour was not covered 




No. 630.— Tabard of John Fbld, Eaq., a.d. 1477. 

by any (Garment, until after 1450, when the Tabard was 
introduced. It was short, and had wide sleeves reaching to 

K 2 



132 MISCBLLANBOUS NAMES AND TITLES. 

the elbows; and the arms of the wearer were displayed on 
both the front and back of the Tabard itself, and of its sleeves. 
The Brasses to Sir John Say, a.d. 1473, at Broxbonme, Herts; 
to John Feld, Esq., a.d. 1477, at Standon, Herts; and to 
Peter Gerard, Esq., a.d. 1492, at Winwick, Lancashire, are 
good examples. No. 630 represents the Tabard of John Feld, 
with its armorial blazoniy, — gtk^ afease or, hdween ihree eagles 
displayed arg.^ gutUea du sang. One eagle only is visible above 
the fesse on the sleeves. An excellent example of the military 
Tabard in its earliest and partially developed form appears in 
the sculptured effigy of John Fitz-Alan, Earl of Arundel, 
A.D. 1434, at Arundel. This Tabard has the sleeves adjusted 
more closely about the upper arms than was the custom at a 
later period; it is charged with the quartered arms of Fitz- 
Alan and Maltravers. The Tabard remains in use as the Offi- 
cial Habit of Heralds. 

Templars : — see Chap. XX., Section 2. 

TkisOe :— the Badge of Scotland : see Chapter XIX., Section 4. 

Timbre: — ^the Helm, when placed above the Shield in an 
Achievement of Arms ; No. 301, Fl. I., &amp;o. 

Tinctures ;— the Metals, Colours, and Furs of Heraldry. See 
Chap. IV. 

Thinehean : — the official Badge of the Earl Marshal of Eng- 
land, consisting of a golden Bod, tipped at each end with 
black enamel, and having the Boyal Arms blazoned on the 
upper, and the Earl Marshal's own arms on the lower end. It 
was granted, with the Patent of the Earl Marshal's Office, in the 
ninth of Bichard IL, to Thomas Mowbray, Earl of Nottinoham. 
See No. 299, Chap. XXVH. 

UUter, Badge of .'--Bee Baronet : also. No. 177, PI. IX. 

Vert : — ^the Colour Oreen. 

Victoria Cross: — see Chap. XX., Section 12. 

Ftei^:— the trail, or trace of any Animal of the Chase. 

VisiiaUons, HieroZeb* .'—periodical Circuits performed at inter- 



MISCELLANEOUS NAMES AND TITLES. 133 

▼als of about thirty years by the Heralds, under the authority 
of Boyal Commissions, for the purpose of inquiring into all 
matters connected with the bearing of Arms, Genealogies, 
and similar subjects, for collecting information, and for drawing 
up authoritative Becords. The earliest of these Visitations 
took place in the year 1413, but they did not become general 
until after the commencement of the sixteenth century. The 
latest Commission of Visitation bears date May 13, 1686. 
On these occasions the Heralds were attended by Begistrars, 
Draftsmen, and other appropriate officers. The Becords of 
these Visitations are preserved in the College of Arms, and a 
large proportion of the hereditary Arms of the Bealm is borne 
on their authority. 

VisccwU : — ^the fourth Degree and Title in the Order of Bank 
in the British Peerage, intervening between the Earl and the 
Baron. In Latin, Vice-Comes. This dignity was first granted 
by .Henry VI., a.d. 1440, to John, Baron Beaumont, K.6. A 
Viscount is BigJU Honourable^ and is styled " My Lord." His 
Sons and Daughters are Honourable. The Coronet, first granted 




No. 317. 
by James I., enclosing a Cap like those of the other Orders of 
Nobility, has a row of fourteen Pearls (smaller than those of 
the Baron's Coronet) set upon a Circle of Gold, the Pearls 
being in Contact. In representations nine of these Pearls are 
shown; No. 317. The Parliamentary Bobe of a Viscount is 
scarlet, and it has two and a half Doublings of Ermine, llie 
wife of a Viscount is styled a Viscountess. See Coronet. 

Wreaih or Orle : — a Circlet entwined about a Helm to sup- 
port the Crest, and which is still represented as discharging 



134 MISCELLANEOUS NAMES AND TITLES. 

that office beneath the greater number of the Crests of Modem 
Heraldry. This Wreath was formed of two Bounds or EoUs 
of Silk or other rich material, one of them of the principal 
Metal, and the other of the principal Colour in the Arms, which 
were twisted in such a manner as to show the Metal and the 
Colour in alternation, the Metal having the precedence in re- 
presentations ; Nos. 318, and 318 a, PI. XV. Many of the 
MedisBval Helm-Wreaths were splendidly enriched; and nu- 
merous fine examples exist in sculptured and engraven monu- 
mental effigies: Nos. 257, 258, PI. XVI., represent the close- 
fitting and the projecting types of Crest- Wreath, from the Effi- 
gies of Sir Hugh Calvelet, and of Balph Neville, Earl of 
Westmoreland. The Crest- Wreath of Sir John Harstck, a.d. 
1374, in his Brass at Southacre, No. 301, PL I., is one of the 
earliest known examples ; but the Crest of Sir Hugh Hastings, 
in his Brass at Elsyng, also in Norfolk, a.d. 1347 — ^it is a huHTs 
. liead couped — also rests upon a Crest-Wreath, which is carried by 
a helm with its mantling. See Crat in Chap. XVII., Section 2. 
Torhist Badge and OdUar: — ^formed of Suns and Boses. See 
Chap. XX., Section 6. 




No. 408. Achievement of Arms of John Daubtqn^ a.d. 1345, from hiB 
monumental slab at Norton Briae, Oxfordahire. Bee p. 46 and Chap. XV. 




No. 335 A. Quartered Sliield of Arms bome upon one of her seals by 
Isabella, Qneen of Edward II. See also No. 335 o, PL LXXX. 



CHAPTER XIV. 



MARSHALUNQ AND INHERITANCE. 



The Association of certain Heraldic Insignia, or " Arms," 
with the Possessors of certain Dignities or Properties, and the 
Transmission of the Heraldry with the Bank and Estates by 
Hereditary Descent, wonld often render it necessary for the 
same Individual to bear more than one Armorial Ensign, since 
instances might occur in which several Dignities with their 
appanages might become concentrated in a single person. So 
also with Families and Estates, it might happen that a single 
Individual would in some instances become the sole Bepresenta- 
tive of several Houses, and the Possessor of Accumulated 
Properties. Again : Alliances might be formed between persons 
either entitled to bear the same Arms, or distinguished by 
different Heraldic Insignia, which Alliances Heraldry might 
both significantly declare and fia.ithfully record. Hence arose 
the System which Heralds call Marshalunq. 

This Marshaluno, accordingly, is the practical application of 



136 MABSHALLING AND INHEBITANCE. 

the Principles which guide Heralds in their own treatment of 
Heraldry, when they would employ it to chronicle History, and 
to record Biography. 

With the right to possess and to bear Heraldic Insignia is 
directly associated the privilege to transmit and to inherit them. 
For while, in the first instance, strictly personal in their charac- 
ter, Arms, at a very early period in the History of Heraldiy, 
were regarded and treated as hereditary possessions. Hence it 
becomes necessary that the Mabsballing and the Inhebitance 
OF Abms should be considered together. 

In the days of the early Heralds there existed a Goubt of 
Ghivalby, which took cognizance of matters connected with the 
Inheritance and the Bight and Title to bear and to transmit 
Arms ; but at the present day it would be difficult to appeal on 
any such points to higher or more definite authorities, than the 
usage of Heraldry and that prescriptive right to which the 
power of Law is frequently conceded. 

Heraldic Insignia or '* Arms " are unquestionably ** property ;" 
and the lawful holder of Arms has in them a true estate in fee. 
This possession, however, is now subject to these two remark- 
able and important conditions: first, the lawful possessor of 
Arms does not possess any right or power to alienate them ; and, 
secondly, the inheritance of Arms is restricted to Heirs who are 
lineally descended from the first lawful possessor of those Arms. 
In the 14th and 15th centuries, indeed, deeds of questionable 
validity were frequently executed for alienating what may be 
entitled heraldic property ; and in the 14th centuiy Arms were 
occasionally granted, without any restriction, to Heirs general : 
still, in our own times the general Bule obtains, on the one hand, 
that Arms cannot be alienated, and, on the other hand, that 
Arms can be inherited only by lineal descendants. Sound He- 
raldry certainly determines both that the true title to Arms is 
Inheritance, and that the true Inheritance of Arms descends 
with the direct lineage. 



MASSHALLINO AND INHERITANCE. 137 

It is also a general Rule of Heraldry that the right to hold and 
use the Arms of a Family appertains to the existing Head of snch 
Family, and is possessed by him with his personal position, and 
with the £unily dignities and property that are vested in him. 

In tracing descent, male issue always has the preference ; and 
where there exist several male descendants equal in the degree 
of their hereditary relationship, the eldest always has the pre- 
ference. Should a male Heir of direot lineage fail, a female suc- 
ceeds ; and if there be several female descendants equal in degree 
they all inherit equally. 

The Heir, while he yet continues to be heir, bears the Arms 
of his Father (or other lineal progenitor), with the addition of 
that Difference which the usage of Cadency assigns to the Heir 
as his own proper distinctive mark. All the Sons also now bear 
their Father's Arms, in each case the appropriate mark of Ca- 
dency being added. It will be understood that neither the Heir 
nor the Cadets of any House bear the impaled Arms of their 
Father and Mother ; but, on the contrary, should their Father 
bear their Mother's Arms on an Escutcheon of Pretence, then 
they all bear their Father's Arms charged with their Mother's 
Escutcheon of Pretence, their several Differences being charged 
upon their Father's Shield and not upon the Inesoutcheon. 

When the Heir succeeds, he inherits the Arms of his Father 
without any Difference, and without the Arms of his Mother ; 
but if his Mother had been an Heiress, he quarters her Arms 
with the Arms of his Father ; that is, he inherits the Arms of 
both his Father and his Mother, and thus becomes the possessor 
of a quartered Shield, with the power and privilege to transmit 
it to his descendants. 

Daughters all bear an lozenges the same Arms as their eldest 
brother bears (or the same as their eldest Brother would bear, 
had they any such Brother), both during the lifetime of their 
Father and after his decease, but without any mark of Cadency 
whatever. 



138 MABSHALLINO AND INHERITANCE. 

Mabshalung, as distinguished from Blazoning^ may be defined 
to signify — ^I. The Arrangement and Disposition of more than 
one distinct Heraldic Composition, or Goat of Arms, upon a 
single Shield : — or, 

II. The Disposition and Aggronpment of two or more dis- 
tinct Shields of Arms, so that they shall form and constitute a 
single Heraldic Composition : — and 

III. The Association of certain Accessorial Devices and In- 
signia with the Shield of Arms, with the view to render any 
Heraldic Composition absolutely complete in every consistent 
and appropriate Detail. It will be desirable to consider Mar- 
SHALUNQ under each of these three applications of its Principles 
and System of Action. 

L The Arrangement and Disposition of two or more 
DISTINCT Coats of Arms upon a Single Shield, would na- 
turally admit of two primary disHncUona, the one having re- 
ference to such combinations as would constitute a pennaneat 
Heraldic Chronicle, to be transmitted upon precisely the same 
principle as an Heir would inherit the Arms with the Estate 
of his Father; and the other having regard only to a tempo- 
rary Alliance, which would extend to and be terminated with 
the life of the Person who would bear the United Arms. 
Heraldry is very careful in thus discriminating between a Com- 
bination which is, and another which is not, to become heredi- 
tary. 

The non-hereditary Combination which is habitually mar- 
shalled by Heralds, is that produced by the Union of the Arms 
6f a Husband with those of his Wife, in all cases in which the 
wife does not possess in her own person hereditary rank, or is 
not the Heiress, or Bepresentative, (or Co-Heiress, or Co- 
Kepresentative) of any Family. It is obvious that if in every 
instance the Arms of a Mother were borne by her sons, with 
their Father's Arms, and the two thus united were to be con- 
tinually transmitted, there would speedily arise so great a 



MABSHALLINQ AND INHERITANCE. 139 

complioation of Armorial Insignia as would inevitably render 
Heraldry itself either an impossibility, or a mere arbitrary and 
nnmeaning method of Ornamentation. Under all ordinary 
circnmstances, therefore, in suoh marriages as those that have 
been specified, the Arms of the Husband and the Wife are borne 
together (in the manner immediately to be described) by the 
Hnsband and the Wife, and by the Survivor of them ; but, the 
Arms of the Wife are not hereditary, and are not borne by any, 
either of her own Children, or of their Descendants. The only 
admissible Deviation from this Law wonld apply to the con- 
tingency of some very nnnsnal alliance, (as between a private 
gentleman and a Princess, the Princess being absolutely dower- 
less,) when the Lady's remarkable personal Bank or Position 
might justify a departure from heraldic Bule — a departure that 
would exactly fulfil the conditions of such an exception as would 
corroborate the Bule itself. 

The Arms of a Etuiband and Wife are marshalled in a single 
Shield by an heraldic process, entitled ImpalemenL It is 
effected by dividing the Shield by a vertical line through its 
Fesse-point, into two equal parts, (as in No. 9, Chap. IIL), and 
then placing one complete Coat of Arms in each half of the 
Shield. The Arms of a Husband and Wife are thus impaled, the 
Arms of the Husband always occupying the Dexter, and those 
of the Wife the Sinisler half of the Shield. In thus impaling 
two Coats of Arms, the arrangement of the Charges and their 
proportions are in every instance to be adapted to the altered 
space afforded by the impaled Shield. In descriptive blazoning, 
each Coat of Arms so far retains its own distinctive indivi- 
duality, that the second description is treated as altogether 
distinct from the first, though the two descriptions are grouped 
together. I assume, for the sake of illustration, that a 
Staffobd marries a Butler ; then their impaled Shield, No. 319, 
is blazoned, or, a Ohevron gtdes, for Stafford, No. 319 A; im- 
paling, or, a Chief indented azure, for Butler, No. 319 b : see 



140 HABSHALLINO AND INHERlfANGE. 

PI. XXiy. This Impaled Shield sets forth that the Stafford 
who married a Butler had impaled his wife's Arms (which she 
bore as her Father's Daughter, and not as his Heiress or Go- 
Heiress) with his own Arms of Stafford. But should the lady 
be an Heiress or Co-Heiress of the House of Butler^ instead of Im- 
palement, another process would be adopted. The Arms of ihe 
Heiress (in accordance with a comparatively recent usage) are 
placed upon a small Shield in Pretence upon the Shield of Stafford. 
And this would be done by each Co-Heiress on her marriage, 
should there be Go-Heiresses. Such is the usage which now 
obtains. It must be observed, however, that a Husband then 
only has a true heraldic right to bear in Pretence the Arms of 
the Heiress his Wife when he has by her Issue, who, after his 
decease, may quarter her Arms with his own. This Marshalling 
in Pretence is shown in No. 354, PI. XXIV, The Impaled 
Shield, No. 319, is not hereditary, and the Butler Arms would 
not be transmitted to the Issue of the marriage. But the Arms 
of the Heiress are hereditary, and would be transmitted. They 
are to be permanently associated with the Arms of Stafford, and 
the two together are to become the Quartered Arms of the suc- 
ceeding Descendants and lineal Heirs and Representatives of the 
united Houses of Stafford and Butler. Thus, if the Butler Lady 
were not an Heiress, her Ghildren and Bepresentatives would 
bear simply their Father's Arms of Stafford, as No. 319 A; but 
the Ghildren and Descendants of the Butler Lady who toas an 
Heiress would quarter BuUer tnth Afford, as in No. 355, which 
has in the 1st and 4th Quarters Stafford, and Butler in the 2nd 
and 3Td Quarters. The Blazon would be. Quarterly, 1st and 4tA, 
Stafford ; 2nd and 3r&lt;2, Botler. 

Thus, a permanent and hereditary combination of two Goats 
of Arms has arisen, produced through the circumstance that 
the Son of an Heiress is Heir to his Mother as well as to his 
Father ; and this conjoint Inheritance Heraldry sets forth, re- 
cords, and hands down to succeeding generations through its 



MAaSflAiriflNG. 



'rAPTEB XV 





^ 


Ay\A 


/\Ays 


A'. 


/ 


^ 


I 


&gt;^ 



A 


Ayvs/N/^v 




y 





F:a-fiXxiv. 



MABSHALLING AND INHERITANCE. 141 

happily appropriate and oonsisteiit Bystem of MahhaUing by 
QiuarUring. 

In Qaartering Arms in our own times we have to keep in re- 
membrance that the first Quarter is always to be charged with 
the Arms that are the most important in the group ; and also 
that the other Coats take precedence in the quartered compo- 
sition in their order of chronological association, that is, as they 
severally were added to the group and incorporated with it — as 
modem Heralds say, as they were *' brought in/' With a view 
to illustrate Marshalling as it is now practised, I proceed to 
exemplify the varied treatment of two Goats of Arms under dif- 
ferent conditions of this process. I shall employ throughout the 
Shields of Stafford and Butler, Nos. 319 a and 319 b, which I 
have already shown combined by simple Impalement in No. 
319, PI. XXIY., and which also appear in No. 354 in the same 
Plate with the Arms of the Butler Heiress marshalled in Pre- 
tence upon the Shield of her Husband ; and again, in No. 355, 
these two Shields appear quartered^ as they would be borne by 
the Descendants of the Butler Heiress and her Husband. 

Now, assuming that another Stafford, a Son, or lineal De- 
scendant of this Butler Heiress, and himself, therefore, bearing 
** Stafford and BuUer quarterly" No. 355, should many a Cahp^ 
bell, then, as before, if the Lady be not an Heiress, he simply 
Impale* Campbell, No. 356, gyronny or and sable, with his own 
quartered Arms, as in No. 357 ; or, if the Lady be an Heiress, 
upon his own quartered Shield he places Campbell in Pretence, 
as in No. 358. From thenceforward the hereditary Shield in- 
cludes Campbell in its Quarterings, and it assumes the aspect of 
No. 359. And so, in precisely the same manner, other Quarter- 
ings might be introduced during the lapse of time ; or the Shield, 
No. 359, with its three Quarterings, might long remain un- 
changed. 

There yet remains one contingency that requires attention. 
In the case of a Daughter of the Campbell Heiress, any such 



142 HABSHALUNQ AND INHERITANCE. 

Lady would bear the ArmB of Stafford, Butler, and Campbell 
quarterly, No. 359, on a Lozenge, and not on a Shield. Were 
she to marry, if she herself were not to be an Heiress, her Hus- 
band wonld simply impale with his own Arms her quartered 
Arms ; and their Children would bear their Father's Arms only. 
But if she, like her Mother, were to be an Heiress, then, as 
before, her Husband would charge her quartered Arms upon a 
separate Shield in Pretence upon his own; and their Children 
and Descendants would quarter the quartered Shield of the Heiress, 
This must be exemplified. 

Suppose the Daughter of the Campbell Heiress (who would 
bear No. 369) to marry a Bentinck, who bears, — Az.^ a Cross 
moline arg.^ No. 360: if she is not an Heiress, her quartered 
Shield is impaled by her Husband, as in No. 362 ; but if an 
Heiress, her quartered Shield is set in Pretence upon the Ben- 
tinck Arms, as in No. 363. In order to transmit these Arms by 
means of Quartering, a new modification of that process will be 
necessary, since now a quartered Shield has to be quartered. The 
Marshalling now proceeds by Quarterly Quartering, Here, as in 
No. 16, p. 17, the primary Quarters are Grand Quarters, any or 
all of which may be quartered. We require a Shield quarterly 
quartered in the 2nd and 3rd Quarters, as No. 364. In this 
Shield, Grand Quarters 1 and 4 bear Bentinck ; and Grand Quar- 
ters 2 and 3 are each charged with Stafford, BirrLER, and Camp- 
bell. This Shield becomes hereditary, and admits of farther 
quarterings, should occasions arise, upon the same system. If a 
Son of the Campbell Heiress, who had married a Stafford- 
BoTLER, were to marry a Be^ttinck, he would simply impale her 
Arms, or if she were an Heiress, would charge them in Pretence 
upon his quartered Shield, No. 359 ; and in this last case, his Chil- 
dren would quarter Bentinck in the 4th Quarter, as in No. 361. 

Should a man bearing a quartered Shield marry an Heiress, 
he would place her Arms in Pretence upon his own quartered 
Shield. Should her Arms be quartered, then the hereditaiy 



MABSHALLING AND INHEBITANCE. 148 

Shield would be quarterly quartered, and each of the Grand 
Quarters would be quartered; and the quartered Anns of the 
Father would be in the Ist and 4th Grand Quarters, and the 
quartered Arms of the Mother in the 2nd and 3rd Grand Quar- 
ters. If any student will work out such a system of Marshalling, 
he will speedily become familiar with the entire range of quar- 
tering, while at the same time he will be impressed with the 
versatility and the precision of Heraldic Chronicles. The Peer- 
age, with such old authorities as may be available, will furnish 
an ample variety of examples for study and practice. 

When younger Sons bear the Quartered Shield of their Father 
and the Heiress their Mother, t£ey place their naaik of Cadency 
so that it may cover all their quarterings. 

In the case of a Gentleman marrying an Heiress, and having a 
Daughter by her but no Son, and afterwards having a Son by 
another marriage, the Daughter is the Heir of the Heiress her 
own Mother, but she never becomes Heir of her Father. Such 
a Daughter, therefore, inherits the Arms of her Mother, while 
her Brother of the half-blood inherits the Arms of their Father. 
In order to save a Lady thus circumstanced from losing all 
heraldic memorial of her Father, the usage of Heraldry authorises 
her to have recourse to MarduiUing by Incorporation, and either to 
charge the Arms of her Father upon a Canton, this Canton to be 
added to her*Matemal Arms, or to place her Father's Arms in 
the chief of the Lozenge upon which she bears the Arms of her 
Mother. The Arms thus augmented by Incorporation are trans- 
mitted to the Descendants of the Lady, who, in this manner, 
would show that she was the Heir of her Mother but not of her 
Father. 

Augmentations of Honour, which in the first instance are charged 
upon small Shields of Pretence, are never quartered, but always 
retain their original position as integral components of their own 
Shields, whether those Shields themselves be or be not quartered. 
See Chap. XXVIII. 



144 MARBHALLINQ AND INHERITAKGE. 

When any Coat of Arms that bears a Bcrdwre or a Tretsure is 
marshalled quarterly with other Coats, then no part of the Bor- 
dure or Tressnre is to be omitted in the quartered Coat ; that is, 
Qwurlering does not affect a Bcrdure or Treasure. Thus, in the 
Eoyal Arms, No. 334, the Tressure of Scotland is blazoned com- 
plete in the second quarter ; and in No. 364 a, F1. XXIII., from &lt; 
the Brass to Lady Tiptoft, at Enfield, a.d. 1446, Powya quarters ; 
Holland, Holland retaining in both quarters the Silver Bordure | 
complete. 

Marha of Cadency remain unaffected by quartering ; and if thej' 
have been assumed, and are retained, they may be transmitted 
and may become hereditary. Thus, the Label of the Courtenays 
has long ceased to be a Difference, and has become an integral 
component of the Courtenay Arms ; but, in the Boll of Henry III., 
the representative of this Family bears, or, three torteaux, without 
any label. 

Archbishops and Bishops impale their paternal Arms with the 
Arms of their Sees, placing the latter on the dexter side of their 
Shields. These and all other Official Arms are not hereditary. 

The Arms of the Herald Kings are marshalled after the same 
manner; that is, they place their Official Arms on the dexter 
side of their Shields, impaling their hereditary insignia. 

Hie Daughter of a Peer bears her Father's Arms, but without 
any Coronet or Supporters ; and her Husband impales her Arms, 
which do not become hereditary. 

Should a Widower many again, he sometimes impales the Arms 
of both his wives, the two being placed in, the Sinister half of 
the Shield, those of the first wife in Chief, and those of the second 
in Base, or both Coats marshalled per pale. But if the former wife 
should have been an Heiress, her Arms would appear in Pre- 
tence upon those of her husband on the dexter side, and the Arms 
of the second wife would be impaled in the ordinary manner ; 
and, contrariwise, if the second wife be an Heiress, her Arms 
would be charged in Pretence upon the Shield still impaled as at 



( 



MARSHALUNa AND IKHEBTTANCK. 145 

fiiBt. In case both the ladies should be Heiresses, then their 
respective Arms might be marshalled fer fesM upon a single 
Escutcheon of Pretence, precedence being given to the first 
wife ; or, the second Shield of Pretence might be charged upon 
the first, as in No. 720, PI. LIU. The Inheritance of these 
Arms is clear and decided ; but the hereditary qnarterings in 
every such instance would have to be determined in accordance 
with the special circumstances of each particular case, but always 
in strict adherence to heraldic principle and heraldic rule. 

An unmanied Lady bears her jiatemal Coat of Arms, whether 
single or quartered, upon a Lozenge^ without any Crest. See 
No. 104. This most inconvenient Lozenge was in use at an 
early period : thus, an example of impaled Arms, blazoned upon 
a Lozenge and borne by a Queen in her husband's lifetime, is 
shown in No. 719, PI. LIL ; the Arms are those of Margaret, 
Queen of James III. of ScoTLAin), about a.d. 1480. 

A TTuIato, not an Heiress, retains the impaled Arms as borne 
by her late hu3band and herself; or, if an Heiress, a Widow 
retains her husband^s Arms charged with her own in Pretence ; 
but, in either case, the Arms of a Widow are borne upon a 
Lozenge^ and without a Crest. Should a Widow marry a second 
time, unless her former husband was a Peer, she ceases to bear 
his Arms. The Marshalling of the Arms of the Widow of a 
Peer who may marry again is given in the next Section of this 
Chapter. 

The Arms of Carporaie BodieSy and also pf InstiiuHons and Asso- 
ciaiumBy of whatsoever kind, may be marshalled by means of 
]*egular quartering, the several Coats of Arms being arranged 
and assigned to their proper quarters in the Compound Com- 
position in the order of their relative precedence. 

MarshaUing hy Ineofporation, that is, instead of quartering, 
actually constructing a single Coat of Arms from the component 
elements of two or more distinct heraldic compositions, is gene- 
rally repudiated by modem Heralds as inconsistent with that 



146 MARSHALLING AND INHEBTTANCE. 

distinct and expressive definition wliich Heraldry impresses on 
its productions. Still, a foremost place in the very front rank 
of English Heraldry must be assigned to the Union Jack, which, 
as I have shown, is an example of such Marshalling by Incor- 
poration : see Nos. 63 and 64, p. 26, and also Chap. XYIII. As 
I have just shown also (p. 143), in modem practice a paternal 
Coat is marshalled by Incorporation upon the Arms of a daughter 
who is Heir to her mother but not to her father, and thus is 
transmitted to that daughter's children and descendants. 

When first introduced. Impalement was effected in a manner 
which, however natural in the first instance, would necessarily 
be speedily abandoned, since it would be found in many in- 
stances to affect and even to destroy the distinctive character 
of the Charges, and therefore to overthrow heraldic accuracy 
and truthfulness. The primitive method of Impalement con- 
sisted in actually cutting into halves, by a vertical section, 
each Coat of Arms, and taking the Dexter half of the Huthand's 
Arms, and the Sinistr half of the Wife's Arms, and placing 
these itoo halves side by side in contact, to form a single com- 
bined armorial composition. This was styled Impaling by 
Dimidiation or Dimidiating ; and it appears to have been intro- 
duced into English Heraldry during the Eeign of Edward I., 
A.D. 12720307. I illustrate this process by another historical 
example. No. 194, Plate V., is the Shield of Edmond Plan- 
TAGENET, Earl of Cornwall, (son of Richard Plantagenct, 
himself the Second Son of King John,); and No. 40 a, p. 21, 
is that of his wife, Margaret, daughter of Earl Richard dk 
Clare. This Edmond died a.d. 1300, and his Seal is charged 
with the dimidiated Arms of Cornwall and Clare, No. 320, 
Plate XVIII., of which the blazon is, — arg.^ a Lion ran^, gw., 
crowned or, wUhin a Bordure sable hezantie, for Cornwall, 
(the Lion for Poictou, and the Bordure for Cornwall); im- 
paling by Dimidiation— or, ihree Chevronds gu,, for De Clare. 
It will be observed in No. 320, that each of the Shields, Nos. 



MARSHAlrlrlNG. 



CEAPTETv r/ 




"^ WS" 




pute xvin 



MARSHALLING AND INHERITANCE. 147 

194 and 40 a, is cut in halveB per pale, and that the Dexter half 
of No. 194, and the Sinister half of No. 40 a constitate No. 320. 
The evil effects of Dimidiation are exemplified in a striking 
manner in this dimidiated Shield, in which the three half 
ChemrcneU become as many Bendleta^ and, consequently, the asso- 
ciation with the historical Shield of the De Clares is altogether 
lost. Had Nos. 319 a, and 319 b, PI. XXIV., been dimidiated, 
the Stafford chevron could no longer have been recognized. 
In No. 321, PI. XVIL, I have shovm the Coat of Arms of 
Cornwall and De Clare united by simple impalement. Here 
the arms of De Clare appear complete, though there is neces- 
sarily some modification of the proportion of the chevrons; 
whilo in the Arms of Cornwall the bordure alone is affected 
by the impalement. The Seal of the " Provostry of the town of 
Youghal," in Ireland (see Herald and Oeneahgitty i. 485), about 
A.D. 1274, displays a Shield charged with the dimidiated Arms 
of Clare and FitzGerald : here the Dexter semi-chewons are shown 
in combination with the Sinister semi-saltire of the Irish Coat, 
which in this instance is differenced with a label of three points. 
Another Seal of the same period, for the " Burgesses of Youghal," 
has the same two Shields aide by side, FitzOerald — arg,, a saUire 
Qu, — ^being to the Dexter differenced with a label of five points, 
while a label of three points differences the Shield of Clare. 
The Arms are those of Sir Thomas de Clare, younger son of 
EiCHABD, Earl of Hertford, and his wife Juliana FitzOerald of 
Youghal ; No. 320 a, PL. LXXX. 

Upon one of her seals, Margaret of France, the second Queen 
of Edward I., bears England dimidiating France ancient. 
No. 322, PI. XVIII. The dimidiation in this instance does not 
very materially affect the arms of England, but the fleurs de lys 
are bisected. Two lions rampant are introduced upon this seal, 
on either side of the Shield, respecting it. See Chap. XXIV., 
Sect. 1. I may here refer to a notice in the ArchcBological 
Journal (for the year 1856, p. 134), of a small silver casket in the 

L 2 



148 MA.B8HALLIN0 AND INHERITANCE. 

Goodricli Court GoUeotions, which has on each sloping faoe of 
its lid three quatre-foil panels, containing either Englani dimi- 
diating France, or the same dimidiated coat differenced tnth a label 
of three points : possihly this casket may have been the property 
of Qneen Maboabet, or of her eldest son. Isabelle, the 
Queen of Edwabd II., upon one of her seals also dimidiates 
England and France ancient; and another of her seals is 
charged with her effigy standing between two Shields, one of 
them bearing England, and the other France ancient, dimi- 
diating Navabre; No. 323, PL XVIII, : these shields are 
severally those of her husband and of her father and mother. 
Another characteristio example of the effect of dimidiation 
upon the fleur de lys appears in the Shield, No. 324, PI. XVIII., 
that is carved upon the curious chess-knight^ (about a.d. 1 285), 
in the possession of the Society of Antiquaries of Scotland. 
One of the Shields upon the monument to Earl William db 
Valence in Westminster Abbey, a.d. 1296, bears De Valence 
dimidiating Claremonte Nesle (a French coat), gw., semee of 
trefoils, two barbels haurient, addorsed, or; No. 325, PI. XVIII. 
In Miscellanea Curiosa (Coll. Ann. LXIV.), the Arms of both 
Claremonte and De Barr are blazoned with dolphins em- 
bowed, but the fish are certainly barbels. Other examples of 
dimidiation may yet be distinguished in the Heraldry of the noble 
monument to Earl Aymer de Valence, a.d. 1323, also at West- 
minster. Another good example of this usage appears on the seal 
of Eleanor, widow of Guy Ferre, a.d. 1348, which bears on a shield 
the Arms of Ferre, dimidiating those of Montendre ; No. 325 A, 
PI. LXXX. A Roll of Arms of E. II. gives for " Sire Guy de 
Ferre,'* '* de goules a unfer de molin de argent, e un bastoun de azure ;" 
Montendre is, — gu,, a lion rampt. within an orle of trefoils slipped or. 
From the early dimidiation of two distinct coats of arms, the 
compound devices that occasionally appeal' in more recent 
armorial bearings may be considered to have derived their 
origin. Thus, the anns of the Borough of Great Yarmouth 



:kIAKSHAL-l/IT;[CT A«i&gt; CADENCY 

CHAPTERS XI Y kTi. 



CHESTER. 



CINQUE PORTS. 




SIR ALEXANDER GIFFARD. 




'Ixfe : xxx 



MABSHALLINO AND INHERITANCE. 149 

have resulted from the -shield of England haTing dimidiated 
another shield, azurSy charged with three herrings nakuU in jpdle 
arg.^ finned or: a shield, No. 326, PI. XVIIL, charged with 
these dimidiated arms, and to he referred to about the year 1390, 
occurs upon one of the bosses of the roof of the south aisle of 
the church of Great Yarmouth. In like manner, the arms of 
Ipswich in Suffolk are compounded of England dimidiating an 
azure shield, charged with the huUs of three ships in pale. In 
the church of St. Maiy Quay, Ipswich, are two Brasses to bur- 
gesses of that town, severally a.d. 1525 and 1551 ; upon the 
former^ to Thomas Pownder, the Shield of the borough is 
blazoned with a single half-lion and a single half-ship, the lion 
lacing to the sinister ; but Henry Tool ye, on his Brass, marshals 
a single lion rampant and three half-ships. • The seals of the 
Cinque Ports bear Shields charged with the same Arms — England 
dimidiating (hree ship's hvUs in pale. See Chap. XXIV., Sect. 1. An 
excellent example of a Cinque Port Shield, with the Arms in 
relief, is preserved in the cloisters at Canterbury : it is the third 
from the eastern end of the south walk. At Fordwich, near* 
Canterbury, the compound device, half-lion and half-ship, of the 
Cinque Ports, forms the vane of the church. Again, the Arms 
of the City of Chester are, England^ dimidiating az,^ three garhes 
or ; No. 326 a., PI. LXXX. See Chap. XXXII. 

Ma. Planch^ is of opinion that " to this practice of dimidia- 
tion we owe the double-headed eagle of the German Empire." 
This must imply that one of the dimidiated eagles should 
originally have faced to the sinister. Mr. Planch^ adds 
'*that several instances of dimidiation occur in the arms of 
German Cities and Counts of Flanders, which will illustrate his 
theory for the origin of the German double-headed eagle, by 
showing the effect of the eagle dimidiated by other animals or 
heraldic figures :" and he gives a curious example of the in- 
corporation of a semi-eagle and a semi-lion, the evident result 
of dimidiation, the lion &amp;cing to the sinister, fiom the seal of 



150 



MABSHALUNG AND INHERITANCE. 



AucE D'AvESNES, No. 327, PL XVIII. I may place side by 
Bide with Mr. Planch^'s example, the seal of Peteb Tederade, 
" canonici cretenms " (a personage of whom I am unable to give 
any particulars, bat whoso seal is in existence,) in which the 
eagle faces to the sinister, and the effect of the dimidiation is 
peculiarly striking ; No. 828. The Griffin of English Heraldry 
might reasonably be regarded as a further development of a 
similar dimidiation, unless it is held to be a veritable member 
of that &amp;mily of mediaeval Griffins whose ancestry flourished in 
the remote ages of Assyrian greatness. ISee Chap. XXXII. 

The beautiful and elaborate Mecils that were held in such es- 
teem in the Middle Ages, were frequently charged with heraldic 
insignia in association with rich architectural details. See Chap. 
XXIY., Section 1. In many examples, the early seals of per- 
sonages of eminence display several shields of arms placed in the 
different compartments of a composition of an architectural 
character ; and thus these Shields are grouped together so as to 
form a single compoimd heraldic composition. Thus, the seal 
of Joan, wife of John de Warrenne, Earl of Surrey, though 
not more than one and a half inches in diameter, is chaiged 
with nine distinct heraldic bearings, each of which is so placed 
that it takes a becoming part in the architectural composition. 
In No. 329 I give a diagram of the arrangement of this seal, in 




No. 329. 
the principal parts of which the arms are charged upon lozenges. 
In the centre is 1. Warrenne; 2, 2. are England; 3, 3. ait) De 



MARSHAI/I/ING- AXD CADENCY: 

SHIEI/DS OF ARMS OF THE X)E BOHUNS. 

RAFTERS r.' yyi &amp; xyy 







Plate XX 



MABSHALLINO AND IlTHfiRITAlYCE. 151 

Barr, (No. 329 a, PI. XIX., az.^ crumMee^ two harbeU haurient ad^ 
domed or, wUhin a hordure eugraUed gu.) ; and in the four quatre- 
foils are Xeon and CaslUe alternately. The lady was the daughter 
of Hbnbt, Count De Bark (in France), and Alianore, eldest 
daughter of Edward I., and Alianobe of Castile and Leon. The 
Seal of EoBEBT de Saint Quintin, a.d. 1301, is another good 
example of such an aggroupment of several Shields. It is shown 
in the accompanying diagram, No. 329 b : 1. is an early shield of 
Saint Quintin, cJieqaee org. and vert^ on a feme gu^ ikree marUeU 
or; 2, 2, 2, 2. is Hastings, or, a manche gu.; and 3, 3, 3, 3. is 
FiTZ-W ALTER, or, a fesse hekoeen two ehevron$ gu. ; (Vincent MS. 
SS. in Coll. Arm.). See No. 706 in Chap. XXIV., Sect. 1 ; also 
the seal of £liz. de Bueq, in Norfolk ArchcBol., v. 301. This 
system of gronping together several Shields of arms in an archi- 
tectural composition, would naturally lead to the grouping together 
several eoata ofarme in an heraldic composition. The Shields were 
all home by the same person, and so their several bearings 
might obviously be concentrated upon a single shield. In other 
wbrds, a single Shield charged with any required series of coats 
of arms duly arranged would naturally be substituted, as a more 
compact and expressive arrangement, for a group of separate 
though associated Shields. The quartered blazonry also might 
be actually displayed about his person, or on his Shield, by any 
noble or knight. 

The counterseal of Humphrey de Bouun, fourth Earl of Hebe- 
ford and third Earl of Essex, a.d. 1327, affords an excellent 
illustration of that aggroupment of Shields, of which the full 
development was quartering. This seal, No. 201, PI. XX., bears 
a large central Shield for the Hereford Earldom between two 
smaller ones, No. 330, both of them (guarterltf, or and gules) for 
the Earldom of Essex. The same a^roupment of Shields ap- 
pears upon the counterseal of John de Bouun, the fifth Earl of 
Hereford. Two or more Shields of arms are frequently found 
upon early seals of Royal and Noble Ladies, with their effigies : 



152 



MABSHALLINQ AND INHERITANCE. 



thus, Margaret, second Queen of E. I., is represented upon one 
of her seals having the ihree lions of England charged upon her tunicy 
and having on her right side a shield of France ancient^ and on 
her left side a shield charged vdth a lion rampant. In like manner 
the effigy of Isabella, Queen of E. II., is represented upon her 
seal standing between a shield of England and another of France 
ancient dimidiating Navarre, On her seal Meucent de Montault 
(a.d. 1235) has her own effigy between two Shields, the one 
bearing a Uon rampt,, and the other three flewrsde-lys (Vincent, 
MS. SS. in CoU. Arm.) Again, the seal of Margaret, wife 
of John de Neville, and afterwards of Sir J. Giffard (about 
A.D. 1300), displays her effigy between two Shields, the one to 
the dexter bearing Giffard {gu,^ three lions pass, in pale arg,), and 
the other being charged with a lion rampt. ; upon the tunic of the 
effigy the three lions are repeated. Many other early examples 
might be adduced of this practice of forming groups of Shields of 
arms before true quartering was regularly recognized ; nor was 
this usage altogether superseded by quartering until after the close 
of the fourteenth century. Accordingly, the secretum of Tuom Is 
Plantagenet, youngest son of Edward III., in its three princi- 
pal compartments has his own arms. Diagram No. 331, 2. ; those 
of his Duchess, Alianore de Bohdn, 3. ; his helm and crest 1. ; 
the Swan badge^ 4.; and the legend, 5. In like maimer, the 





No. 329 A. No. 331. 

seal of Thomas Mowbray, Duke of Norfolk, who died in ban- 
ishment at Venice, aj[). 1400, bears three Shields, of which the 



MAKSHALUNa AND INHERITANCE. 153 

central Shield, No. 632, PL LXY., is charged with the arms of 
the CJoNFESsoR, (a special grant from Bichard II.,) impaling 
Brotherton, (Englandj wiA a silver Idbd of five jpoinie) ; the 
dexter Shield bears Mowbrat, (gu.^ a lion rampant org,), and 
the sinister Shield displays Seqrave, (m., a lion rampi. arg.^ 
crowned or,) the arms of the Duke's mother. The Brother- 
ton label was blazoned of three points at a later period ; as in 
No. 299, Chap. XXVII. Mowbrat is sometimes blazoned jpur- 
pwre instead of gvies. On his seal also, John Mowbray, Duke 
of Norfolk, son of the last-named Thomas Mowbray, placed a 
shield of Brotherton between two Shields of Mowbray and as 
many Ostrich Feathers, the Feathers being a special grant. 
Again, Margaret, eldest daughter of Thomas Plantagenet de 
Brotherton, charged her seal with three Shields, those of her 
&amp;ther and her two husbands, John Lord Seqrave, and Sir 
Walter Manny : or, three chevronds sa.^ the middle one charged 
with alioncel passant of the field (Roll of Arms, a.d. 1337-1350); 
but in the Calais Eoll of Edward III., this lioncel is rampaiU. 
I may add that a Castle of Castile appears on either side of the 
reverse of the great seal of Edward. II. ; and that Edward III., 
when on his accession he used his father's seal, added a smaU 
fieuT-de^ys above each of the castles ; while on his own first great 
seal, published iu October, 1327, there appear ttoo large fieurs- 
de-lys without the castles. 

But, before the usage obtained for marshalling a series of 
distinct and complete coats of arms by quartering so as to pro- 
duce a single compound heraldic composition, the desired com- 
bination of two or even three coats of arms upon a single Shield 
was frequently effected by forming a new composition from all 
the charges of the several Shields, or from the most important 
and characteristic of them. Many of the early historical Shields 
of our English Heraldry were unquestionably produced by this 
simple process of Compounding Arms. For example, John de 
Breux, Duke of Brittany and Earl of Richmond (died a.d* 



154 KABSHALLINO AND INHERITANCE. 

1330), whose mother was a daughter of Henry m., when he 
accompanied his uncle, Edward L, to the siege of Caer- 
laverock, displayed a banner charged with ehequee or qi»A ia.y 
(Be Dreux^) vfUk a hordure of England, (gu., wUh eight lions of 
EngUxnd^ and a canUm ermine to represent the ermine Shield 
of Brittany; No. 116, PL V. The fine Shield of Prince John 
'' of Eltham," second son of Edward II. and of Isabella of 
France (admirably scxdptnred in alabaster with his effigy at 
Westminster), is charged with England wiihin a hordure of France, 
No. 332, PL XIX. : this is both a true example of compounded 
arms, and also a Shield dififerenced with a bordure. Thus Mar- 
bhalling gained an important advance when the oounterseal of 
Margaret, second Queen of Edward I., had suggested (as we 
may presume that it did suggest) the Shield of her husband's 
grandson. This counterseal, one of the most interesting of our 
Boyal Historical Series, bears the skidd of England suspended 
from a tree, and surrounded on the field of the seal itself with a 
border of fleur-de-lys ; No. 332 a, PL LXXXI. The well-known 
Shield of the Bohuns, of which so many fine original examples 
are still in existence, has been adduced by Mr. Planch^ as a 
remarkable example of the early heraldic uss^e now under con- 
sideration. The blazon of this Shield, No. 201, PL XX., is azure, 
a hend argent, cotised and between six lioncels rampt. or. (See 
Chap. XYII., Section 3.) The founder of the BonaNS as an 
English family was a Humphrey de Bohun, one of the fortunate 
adventurers at Hastings. His son of the same name acquired 
important territorial possessions near Salisbury, by his marriage 
with Matilda, daughter of the feudal Baron, Edward de Sarum. 
Their son, another Humphrey de Bohun, married Margeria, one 
of the co-heiresses of Milo, Constable and Lord of Gloucester 
and Hereford, and their grandson, Henry de Bohun, aj&gt;. 1199, 
was created Earl of Hereford. Now, the arms attributed to 
the Earls of Salisbury, and borne by the renowned son of Fair 
BOSAMOND, Wm. de LoNOEsr^E, aro azure, six UonceU rampi, or. 



HABSHALLING AND INHERITANCE. 155 

No. 200, p. 89 : and these aims the Bohuns may be considered to 
have adopted in commemoration of their own advantageouB al« 
liance with an heiress of Salisbury. The arms attributed to Miu&gt;, 
on the other hand, (and still emblazoned and quartered ill the 
Brass to his descendant, Auanore, Duchess of GijDUCbsteb,) 
are gtdes^ two benda^ Ihe one or and the other argent; No. 333, 
PL XX. As Lords of Hereford in their own persons, the 
Bohuns evidently placed upon their Shield the silver bend of 
Hereford, interposing it between the two groups into which 
their Salisbuiy lioncels would thus be divided ; and at the same 
time, further to show their descent from Milo, they appear to 
have bisected his golden bend bend-wise, and then to have 
cotised their own silver bend with the two bendlets thus 
obtained. Possibly these bends of the Shield of Milo may be 
heraldic representations of the ofiScial batons of that bold war- 
rior, as Constable of the Castles of Gloucester and Hereford; 
and in the Shield of the Bohuns their bend in the first in- 
stance may have been regarded as associated with the office 
and rank of Constable of England, so long held in the De 
Bohun family with their Hereford Earldom. (For a further 
notice of the arms of the Bohuns, see Chap. XV., Differencing 
hymuUets.) 

In Scotland the Stuarts produced a compound Shield by 
encircling their own fesse chequ^e, (or, a fesse eheguie org, and 
(K.,) with the Koyal tressure. In 1374, the seal of David, son 
of Eang BoBERT Stuart and Euphemla, Countess of Strathem, 
is charged with the Stuart fesse interposed between the two 
chevrons of Strathem, the whole being within the tressure: 
and, A.D. 1377, upon the seal of Alan Stuart of Ochiltree, the 
chequ^e fesse is surmounted with a bend charged with three 
bueJUee, such being the arms of Ochiltree. 

The Union Jack Flags of James I. and George ni. are more 
recent but eminently characteristic examples of compounding 
arms. See Chapters VI. and XVIII. 



156 MABSHAXUNG AND INHERITANCE. 

An easy step in advance from such a composition as the seak of 
the fourth and fif(;h Earls of Hereford, Nos. 201 and 300, and 
from others of the same class, leads us on to the true Quariering 
of Artna. This mode of arrangement, indeed, was suggested to 
the Heralds of the Edwards by such Shields as were simply 
quartered for diversity of tincturing, as in the two small Shields, 
No. 330, in No. 33 b, p. 25, and in No. 156, PL VL Numerous 
examples of such Shields quarterly of two tinctures occur in the 
early Bolls. 

The process of Quarterinq divides the field of a single Shield 
into four divisions of equal area, by one vertical line cutting one 
horizontal line, as in No. 11, p. 17. Into each of these divisions 
one of the coats of arms to be '* quartered " is placed. If there 
are four coats, one of them is placed in each of the four quarters, 
their precedence being determined by their relative importance 
— that is, in almost all cases determined by the seniority of the 
several coats in their present alliance. Should there be two 
coats of arms only to be quartered, the first and fourth quarters 
both bear the most important coat, and the second and third 
quarters bear the other coat; as in No. 355, Fl. XXIY. In 
the case of three coats of arms for quartering, the fourth quar- 
ter repeats the coat that is charged upon the first quarter ; as 
in No. 359. The Eoyal Arms of England, (No. 334, Chap. 
XIX., and No. 543 a, PI. LIX.,) as now borne by Her Majesty 
the Queen, exemplify a Shield thus quartered with three quar- 
terings : it is charged with, 1 and 4, England ; 2, Scodand ; and, 
3, Ireland. Four coats of arms, when quartered, are placed 
in their proper order of succession, each in one of the four quar- 
ters of the Shield, as in No. 361, Fl. XXIY. Again, should 
more than four coats of arms require to be quartered upon 
one Shield, the field of that Shield is to be divided, upon the 
same principle as before, into the requisite number of com- 
partments, and such repetitions are to be introduced as the 
special circumstances of each case may render necessary. Thus 



MARSHALLING AND INHERITANCE. 167 

in No. 15, p. 17, the Shield is quarterly of eight. If one of 
the Shields to be quartered is iUdf quartered, it is to be treated 
precisely as if it were one single coat of arms, and such a coat 
is said to be quarterly quartered. Quarterly quarters are 
shown in No. 16. The early Heralds also occasionally quar- 
tered impaled coats of arms: but in more recent Marshalling 
impaled coats are held to be ineligible for quartering; and, in- 
deed, the act of quarterly quartering at once indicates and super- 
sedes an impalement. 

The earliest example known in England of a Shield upon 
whicb two distinct armorial ensigns are marshalled by quarter- 
ing, is the shield. No. 135, PI. I., upon the monuipent of 
AuANORE, Queen of Edward I., ,at Westminster. It bears 
quarterly, 1 and 4, Castile; and, 2 and 3, Leon. Its date 
is 1291. These quartered arms were first adopted by the 
father of Queen Auanore, Ferdinand III., on the union of 
the provinces of Castile and Leon under his rule. In this 
noble monument, the beautiful effigy of the truly royal Lady 
rests upon a plate of gilt latten, that is covered with a diaper 
of casdes and lions alternating in lozenges. Upon her seal the 
effigy of the Queen stands between a castle and a lion in pale to 
the dexter, and a lion a/nd casUe in pale to the sinister : the coun- 
terseal has a shield of England only suspended from a tree. One 
of the smaller enamelled Shields that yet remain upon the south 
side of the monument of Edward III., in Westminster Abbey, 
is charged with this quartered shield of CaslUe and Leon impaling 
France ancient and England quarterly. 

Contemporary with the Westminster Abbey Shield is the 
mail-clad and cross-legged effigy in Winchester Cathedral, that 
Mr. Walford has such good reason for assigning to Sir 
Arnold de Gaveston, the father of Pjers de Gaveston, the 
favourite of Edward II. This armed effigy has a Shield 
charged with a cross, which quarters, 1 and 4, or, two cxars 
passant gules, collared and helled az., being the arms of Gas- 



158 MARSHALLING AND INHERITANCE. 

TON, ViBcoimt DE Bearm ; and, 2 and 3, (kree gmim ; No. 335, 
PL XTX. The piBsence of the cross in this cnrions example 
is precisely such a modification of qnaitering as might, in the 
fiist instance, have been expected. This cross may have re- 
presented a third Shield, or it may have been simply either 
a stmctnral or a decorative accessory of the Shield itself. 
This Shield is sometimes assigned to William de Foix. The 
arms of De Foix aro, or, three paUeU gu. The ^rell-known 
Shield of Pjers de Gaveston himself, who was created Earl of 
Cornwall by his hapless friend, the second Edward, are, 
vertf mx eagleis or; No. 335b, Plate XIX. They are thus 
blazoned for ^'Le Counts de Cornewaile," in the Boll of 
Edward U., a.d. 1308-1314. This Shield formed one of the 
series that were carved nponthe tomb, which supported the 
effigy that Mr. Walford assigns to the elder Graveston. An- 
other of these Shields bore CatUle and Leon quarterly, as they 
still appear npon the monument at Westminster. For all 
particulars relative to Sir Arnold de Gaveston, I must rofer 
to Mr. Walford*s equally able and interesting paper, in the 15th 
vol. of thct ArchcBdogical Journal. 

Somewhat later, Isabella, daughter of Philip IY. of France, 
the Queen of Edward II., upon the roverse of one of her seals 
marshals four coats quarterly: that is, 1, England (her hus- 
band); 2, France (her father); 3, Navarre, (her mother); and 
4, az, a bend arg^ coUsed potent counter-potent or^ for Champagne, then 
a most important appanage of the crown of France ; No. 335 a, 
page 135. In No. 335 c, page 170, I give the Shield of Cham- 
pagne, in order to show more clearly the field of the Shield 
between the counter-potences of the cotises. 

Early in the year 1340 Edward III. adopted his fourth great 
seal, (seal D. of Wilus,) upon which the Boyal Arms appeared 
quartering France Ancient and England^ as in No. 536 b, PI. 
LVIII. This quartered Shield stands foremost in the blazonry 
of the Boyal Heraldry of England. It appears differenced with 



MARSHAli-IflNG. 



:;.t:-T"P '^T\^ 




Piute XIX. 



MARSHALLING AND INHERITANCE. 



159 



tho utmost heraldic skill, and impaled and quartered with a 
long array of noble and famous arms ; and, as the Royal Shield, 
with no other change than in the number of the fleurs-de-lys, it 
continued in use until the accession of the Stuarts to the 
English Crown in the person of James I., in the year 1603. 
The change in the Ist and 4th quarters ^m an azure field 
semSe-deAys or, to a field charged with three golden Jleurs-deJys, 
took place during the reign of Henry IV., perhaps in the year 
1403. This same change had been made by the French Kings 
as early as the year 1364. I must add that Richard II. appears 
to have quartered England and France, as well as France and 
England; that is, he sometimes placed England and sometimes 
France in the first quarter. 

Philippa, the Queen of Edward III., on her secretum quar- 
ters her paternal arms of HainauU with those of her husband ; 
thus, this seal is an early example of compound quartering. It 
is thus blazoned : quarterly, 1 and 4, grand quarters, England ; 
2 and 3, grand quarters, 1 and 4, or, a lion rampant sa.^ for 
Flanders ; 2 and 3, or^ a lion rampant gu,, for Holland ; No. 
337. A small Shield bearing these arms exquisitely carved in 




No. 337. Qneen PmLipPA of HxiNArLT. 
alabaster yet exists upon the south side of the monument to 
Queen Philippa herself in Westminster Abbey. The Shield of 



160 HARSH ALUNO AXD mHERITANCE. 

HainauU also remains, witli another Shield of Navarre, on the 
east end of the monument of Qneen Philippa. The arms of 
E. m. (^France Ancient and England) impale those of Queen 
Philippa upon a Shield in the Brass to Canon John Slefobd, 
A.D. 1401, at Balsam, in Cambridgeshire: he had held the two 
not very consistent offices of Master of the Wardrobe to the King 
and Chaplain to the Queen. A Gorman Herald would have re- 
presented the first and third lions of quarters two and three of 
No. 337 facing to the sinister. See Chap. XXXII. On her other 
seals Queen Philippa impales England with Hainault, and IVance 
with England and HcdnauU. 

The first English subject who is recorded to have quartered 
arms, so far as it is at present known, was Syhon de Montagu, 
whose Shield, No. 635, Plate XTX., is marshalled as follows in the 
Roll of Edward IT., a.d. 1308-1311 :— 

•' Stre Symon de Montagu^ quartile de Argent e'de assure; 
en les quarters de azure les griffons de or; en les quarters de 
argent les daunces de goules" (The ^^daunces^^ are equivalent 
to a group of fusils conjoined in fesse across the shield, which 
is sometimes blazoned as a ^^ dancette" or a fesse dancettee.) 
In this composition two distinct coats of arms borne by Hie 
Montagues are marshalled together by quartering: that is to 
say, — 1. " Argent, a fesse engrailed (or dancettSe) of three pieces 
gules,'* for "William Montague," (Roll of Henry III.); and 2. 
" azure, a griffin segreant or,'' for " Simon de Montagu," (Roll of 
Caerlaverock, a. d. 1300.) ; Nos. 636 and 636 A, PI. XIX. 

The inventory of his property, made in 1322, one year after 
the death of Humphrey de Bohun, third Earl of Hereford, 
at the battle of Boroughbridge, incidentally shows that mar- 
shalling arms by quartering two distinct coats that had become 
allied, was practised by English Heralds in the first quarter of 
the fourteenth century. Among the objects particularly speci- 
fied IS a courte-pointe, quinte-point, or quilt, embroidered quar- 
terly, 'Wcartele" or *' quarieU," of the Arms of England and 



MARSHAIil/lX Cr. 



:.KAPTER &gt;:v 




p;.vte xx: 



Ilfngy of Joroi de lia stints Ear. of Pemri-c. 
from trie 3rASS at Elsvn^. Norfolk. A^:. 134" 



MABSHALLIKG AND lyHERITANCB. 161 

Herbfobd. The Earl had married Elizabeth Plantagenet, the 
youngest daughter of Edwakd L ; so, in evident anticipation of 
impalement, he quarters the arms of his consort with his own ; 
and, as the lady was a Princess, her arms appear in precedence 
in the first quarter. In one of his seals the Earl places the 
three lions of England in cnsped circles about his own shield : 
PL LXX., 3, (No. 398). 

These examples thus deprive John Hastings, Earl of Pem- 
broke, of the honour that has been assigned to him of having 
been the first English subject who quartered arms. This Earl 
married Mabgabet Plantagenet, the youngest daughter of 
Edward III. ; and, in his shield of arms he marshalled by im- 
palement ttoo quartered coats of arms^ — ^his own arms, Hastings 
and De Valence quarterly, and France Ancient and England 
quarterly, the arms of the Princess, his Countess : No. 338 a, 
p. 172. 

In the fine Brass to Sir Hugh Hastings, at Elsyng in Nor- 
folk, the date of which is 1347, there is an effigy of Earl John, 
(who died in 1375), having his jupon charged with Hastings and 
Db Valence quarterly ; No. 338, PI. XXI. This same Brass also 
contains an effigy of Edward III. himself in armour, and his 
jupon of arms bears France and England quarterly. The shield, 
twice quartered and impaled, of the Earl of Pembroke, forms 
one of the small group, carved with the purest artistic feeling 
in alabaster, that still remains to shew how rich and splendid 
was the original heraldic adornment of the monument of his 
royal mother-in-law, Queen Philippa; No. 338 a, p. 172. 

In the cotirse of the second half of the fourteenth century both 
quartering and impaling arms gradually became established as 
heraldic usages, and impaled and quartered shields soon began to 
abound ; nor was it long before quarterings in many instances 
were veiy considerably increased in their numbers. 

I now give a few additional early examples of both impalement 
and quartering. 



162 MAB8HALLING AND INHERITANCE. 

In the well-known Boll of Anns of Henry III., Le Mareschal 
charges a lion rampant gtdes npon a shield per pale or and vert ; and 
the field of the shield of Fitz Mayhewe, is per pale az. and gu, : 
and in the same Boll and in the Boll of Caerlaverock, the arms of 
De Yere, De Mandeville, De Say, Le Despencer, De Bocheford, 
and De Beauchamp have the field quarterly of two tindurea; Wm. 
DE Beauchamp chaises his quarterly shield with a hend^ and the 
De Laci of the first Boll bears a bendlet acible npon a shield quar- 
terly or and gules. Other examples occur in considerable numbers 
in other early Bolls. These early shields may be regarded as the 
prototypes of true impalement and quartering. 

On the monument of Edward III., at Westminster, are two 
noble shields of his own royal arms of France and England quar-- 
terlyj emblazoned in enamel ; also, five others, all of them 
quartered and some of them impaled also, smaller in size, but of 
equal excellence. 

Another very fine example of the quartered royal shield is 
sculptured in the southern spandrel of the entrance archway to 
Westminster Hall : and other examples, most of them with labels, 
surround the monuments of Bishop Burohersh (about a.d. 1370) 
at Lincoln, PL XXXIV ; of the Bijlck PRince at Canterbury ; and 
of Prince Edmond of Langley, at King's Langley. King's Collie 
Chapel, at Cambridge, also contains a splendid series of sculptured 
examples of the Boyal quartered shield of a much later period. 

Upon the Brass of Alianore de Bohun, also at Westminster, 
A.D. 1399, are the following shields : 1. The shield of the hus- 
band of the Duchess Alianore, Thomas Plantagenet, Duke of 
Gloucester — France and England quarterly , noiihin a bordure argent : 
2. The shield of the Duchess herself and her husband impaled ; 
No. 340, PL XX. The Duchess Alianore quarters De Bohun 
and MiLO of Hereford, Nos. 201, and 330, PI. XX. 3. The shield 
of the father and mother of the Duchess Auanore — De Bohun 
impaling Fitz-Alan and Warrenne quarterly^ No. 341, PL XX. ; 
Fitz-Alan is, gu., a lion ran^. or. 



MARSHAIfl/IXG AXD CADEXCY. 

IMPAl/EMEXTS. * 

.?s XV xv: ^ xxv: 



r 



THOMAS HOl.LA&gt;ID 



JAMES n MARY orCUELDRKS. 




BDMQND MARGARET 

TUDOR . B KAI TFORT. TIP TQf T . HOLLAND P OWTS 




FlatP 2JCI. 



MABfiHALLINO AND INHERITANCE. 163 

In a Boll of Arms, temp. Bichard II., (a.d. 1392-1397,) the 
Anns of Thomas, Duke of Qloucestbr, are blazoned in this re- 
markable manner: — Quarterly, 1. France Ancient: 2 and 3. 
E.VGLAND : 4. Db Bohun : and a hordure argevU, which eudoaea only 
the first three quarters. 

In the second of these shields the bordure of Woodstock is not 
dimidiated by the impalement. This is also the case in many 
other early examples of impaled shields which are charged with 
bordures. Thus, Thomas Holland, Earl of Kent, bore, as a 
special grant from Bichard II., the Arms of the Confessor, 
No. 78, PI. I, mthin a bordure ermine, impaling Holland moderny 
that is, impaling England mithin a bordure argent. Upon the seal 
of this Thomas Holland his shield is charged with the impaled 
arms, having both the bordures complete; as in No. 342, 
PI. XXII. In the Seal, the same composition is repeated upon 
the sleeved jupon of the Earl himself and upon the barding of his 
charger. Considerably later, a.d. 1446, the Brass of Lady Tip- 
toft, at Enfield, displays a shield charged with a double impale- 
ment ; that is, Tiptoft, No. 300 A, PL XVIL, (org., a saUire en- 
grailed gu.) impaling HoUand^ and this impaled coat impaling 
Fowys, No. 300 b, (or^ a lion ram^. gu. :) here, as before, the 
bordure of Holland is blazoned without any dimidiation. In 
like manner, upon the seal of Mary of Gueldres, Queen of 
James IL, of Scotland, a.d. 1459, No. 344, PL XXIL, the complete 
tressure appears upon the impaled shield : but upon the monu- 
ment of Margaret, Countess of Lennox, the mother of Lord 
Dabnley, in Westminster Abbey, one of the shields (all of them 
elaborately quartered) impales Scotland, having the tressure 
dimidiated by impalement, No. 345, PL XXII. In No. 344, the 
arms of Gueldres are, oz., a lion ramjpi. or ; impaling Holland, 
or, a lion rampt, «a., the two lions respecting each other, after the 
usage of Continental Heraldry. M. Bouton (Nouveau IVaitS de 
Blason, p. 322,) blazons the arms of Gueldres as, — az., a lion 
rampt. contoume or, crowned and langued gu., impaling Flanders or 

M 2 



164 MABSHALUNG AMD INHERITANCE. 

Holland, — or^ a lien ramjpt. «a., armed org., langued gu, ; No. 722, 
PL Ln., drawn &amp;om M. Bonton's example. In an illuminated 
MS. of the fifteenth century, in the College of Arms, (CoUedanea 
CusrioM^ L. Xiy.), both the lions are crowned, and the lion of 
Gueldres is also quea^ fowrchie. One of the quartered and im 
paled shields upon the monument of Margaret of Bichmond, 
mother of Henry YII., bears France Modern and England 
QUARTERLY, withiu a bordure compony, which bordure is dimi- 
diated ; No. 346, PI. XXII. : the dexter half of this shield, which 
is placed at the east end of the monument, bears the arms of 
Thomas Stanley, Earl of Derby. The shield at the west end of 
this fine monument bears Tudor, No. 482, PI. XXXII., impaling 
Beaufort, both the bordures being dimidiated; No, 346 a, 
P1.XXIL 

Upon one of his seals John Plantagenet of Ghent impales 
CattHs and Leon with France and England differenced with a label 
ermine ; and in this instance, in honor of his royal consort, Con- 
stance of Castile and Leon, he places his own arms on the 
sinister side of the shield : in his other impaled shields the arms 
of this Prince occupy the customary dexter half of the 
escutcheon: he also used seals bearing his own arms without 
any impalement. 

Henrt Boungbroke. afterwards Henry IY., during his fi9kther*s 
lifetime bore England differenced with a label of Lancaster ; but, 
on the death of John of Ghent, he assumed the arms his father 
had borne, ^nd those arms he sometimes impaled with the coat 
of the Confessor. On one of his seals, certainly engraved and 
used between Feb. 3, and September 30, 1399, (the dates of his 
father's death and his own accession), Henry bears the Confcssor 
differenced with a label of three points, impaling France and 
England quarterly with a label of five points of Brittany, impaling 
Lancaster, and this impaled coat impaling De Bohun, for Mary de 
BoHUN, his first wife, who died a.d. 1394. The annexed diagmm, 
No. 347, shows this remarkable aggroupment. In the original 



MARSHAlrlrlXG 



IV 



RirHARDD - ANNRfJFHOHEMlA RICHARD H - ISABEL of FHANCK 

l^T^ 






w^ 



E#* 




HENRY IV - JQANqfJS'AVARRE HENRY VD - ELI Z. or YORK 




l]OLLAND HENRY VI - MARGARET of AN.IOI 

^~z\ — I , ^ ^ 




ZX::: 



Na AND INHERITANCE. 



165 



seal, the shield hangs diagonall j from a large helm SQrmounted 
by the lion crest, and on either side is an ostrich feather 





•- '1 


DCBOHUN 


r=" 


1 

iUIC 


i 

CK 

no- 


V 


Al 
EMfl 


D 
AND 


/ 



No. 847. 



onriotislj entwined with a ribbon charged with the word " so ye 

BEY NB." 

Upon his monument at Ganterbmy, Henby IY. charges the 
first and fourth quarters of his shield with France Modem ; and it 
is probable that his Queen Joan shortly after her second marriage 
adopted the three fleure de lye in place of the field semie de lye. In 
the Canterbury shield, France Modem and England quarterly im- 
pale Navarre and Eureux, 

Henby YI. impaled the arms of his Queen, MABOABErjof 
Anjou ; and thus his own quartered aims, in No. 352, Fl. XXIIL, 
are seen to be marshalled by impalement with a coat of six guar- 
teringe. The quarterings of Queen Mabgabet are blazoned in 
Chap. XIX., Section 5. 

Edwabd IY., as if he felt it to be a point of honour that his 
Queen should be distinguished by an heraldic display at least 
equal in its quarterings to the insignia of her Lancastrian rival, 
granted to Elizabeth Widville on her marriage with him, a series 
of augmentations derived &amp;om the armorial insignia of her nuu 
temal ancestry, all of which were to be borne quarterly, and 
were duly blazoned on their impaled shield. This example was 
improved in a characteristic manner by HenbV YO., in his granta 



166 HABSHALLING AND INHERITANCE. 

of arms to his own successive Consorte. See Chapter XIX., Sec- 
tion 5. 

JoANE of Nayabbe, the second wife of Henbt IY., (she was the 
widow of John de Montfort, Duke of Brittany, and she married 
Henry IY. in 1403,) impaled with her husband's arms those of 
her father, Charles II., King of NoKxxrre and Count of Ewreua ; 
and she bore Navarre and Eureux per fesse, the former in chief, 
and the latter {Framce AncierU charged with a hend compony org. and 
gu.) in base ; No. 348, Fl. XXIII. Queen Joane also quartered 
Eureux and Natxjore, and a shield thus quartered is blazoned upon 
the canopy of the monument to Henry IY. and herself in Can- 
terbury Cathedral. 

BiCHARD II. impaled the Confeaaor with France and England 
quarterly, and again to the sinister impaled Bohemia for Anne, his 
first Queen, No. 349, PI. XXIIL ; afterwards, for Isabella, his 
second Queen, Richard substituted France Ancient in the sinister 
impalement, No. 360, PI. XXITI.; see also No. 629, PI. XXXY. 

Upon his monument in his own chapel at Westminster, Henry 
YII. displays a shield chaiged with his royal arms of France 
Modem and England quarterly, impaling the arms of Elizabeth of 
York, that is, quarterly, in the first grand quarter, France Modem and 
England quarterly, for her father, Edward IY. ; 2 and 3. Ulster, 
(or, a cross gu.) ; and 4. Mortimer, — to declare her descent from 
the Houses of both York and Clarence; No. 351, PI. XXIII. 

Again, the arms of Bichard III., impaling those of his Queen, 
Anne Neviu-e, are blazoned- in the Warwick Boll, now preserved 
in the College of Arms, as follows — France Modem and England 
quarterly, in the dexter half of the escutcheon, impaling quarterly, 
1. Neuburgh, {chequee arg, and az., a chev, erm.,) impaling Beau- 
champ, (gu,, a fesse between six crosses crosslets or) : 2, Montagu, 
(org., three fusils conjoined in fesse gu.,) impaling Manthermer, (or, 
an eagle displayed vert,) : 3. NeviUe, (gu., a saUire arg.,) differenced 
with a label compony of silver and azure : and 4. De Clare, im- 
paling Le JJcspencer, 



MABSHALUNO AND INHERITANCE. 167 

From the Windsor Qarter-Plates I obtain the four following 
examples of Marshalling : — 

Sir John Neville, KG.» Lord Montagu, (afterwards Duke of 
Northumberland,) brother of Bichabd Neville, Earl of Warwick, 
married Isabelle, daughter and heiress of Sir Edmond Engle- 
THORPE; and he fell a.d. 1471, at Bamet: Quarterly; 1 and 4, 
Mofdagu ; 2 and 3, NevQle^ differenced with a labd of three jpoinU 
company org. and ass. ; charged in pretence with an inescutcheon 
bearing, quarterly : 1. Bradstonej Qarg.^ on a cankm gu., a rose or) ; 
2. Englethorpe^ (^, a cross engrailed arg,) ; 3. Be la PolCj (az,, on 
afesse^ between three leopards faces or^ an annulet gu,) ; 4. Montagu. 
BiCHARD Beauchamp, K.G., Earl of Warwick, (died 1439) : 
Quarterly: 1 and 4, Beauchamp; 2 and 3, Neidmrgh; and, in 
pretenoe, the arms of his wife, Isabelle, daughter and heiress of 
Thomas Le Despemcer, Earl of Gloucester : Quarterly : 1 and 4, 
De Clare; 2 and 3, Le Despencer, 

Thus these noblemen associated the arms of the great 
Heiresses, their consorts, with their ovm, in their capacity of 
Knights of the Garter. 

John de Vere, K.G., Earl of Oxford, (his grand&amp;ther, another 
John de Yere, married Elizabeth, daughter and heiress of Sir 
John de Howard) : Quarterly : 1 and 4, De Vere ; 2 and 3, Hounird 
ancient, 

Henry, Lord Stafford, K.G., (second son of Hfjiry Stafford, 
second Duke of Buckingham) ; Quarterly : 1. Woodstock, (No. 340, 
PI. XX.) ; 2. De Bohun, (No. 397) ; 3. Stafford, (or, a chevron gu.) ; 
4. De Bchun of Northampton, (No. 398) ; differenced on the fesse 
point with a crescent. 

In our own times, we have seen a very singular example 
of Quartering in the arms of the late lamented Prince Consort, 
No. 353. H.B.H. Prince Albert differenced the Boyal Arms 
of England, which he quartered in the first and fourth quarters, 
with a label argent charged on the central point with the Cross 
of St. George — an anomaly in Ileraldiy, and indeed an heraldic 



168 MABSHALLINQ AND INHERITANCE. 

contradiction, for which I am altogether unable to offer any 
explanation. Had the Prince home the Boyal Shield of England 
{England^ ScoUandy and Irdand, quarterly) alone, in that case 
a label for difference would have been both a necessaiy and an 
expressive accessory to his shield ; but to have differenced the 
Boyal Arms when quarterly quartered, as in No. 353, in heraldic 
language was to suggest, (for it cannot possibly be said to have 
spoken plainly), that the Boyal Consort of ihe Prince was some 
near relative to the Sovereign of England, but not the illustrious 
Lady herself who wears the Crown of these realms. The 
paternal coat of His late Boyal Highness, marshalled in the 2nd 
and 3rd quarters of No. 353, Is harry of ten, or and sable, a chaplet 
of rue in lend vert, for Saxony. See Chap. XIX., Section VI. 

1 conclude this brief series of examples with the historical 
shield of four quarters, which, next to the Boyal Armoury, 
stands at the head of the modem Heraldry of England — ^the 
Shield of the Earl Marshal, the Duke of Norfolk. This 
Shield, No. 299, (as I have already shown) thus marshals four 
coats of arms of high renown in English history : 1. Howard; 
2. Be Brotherton; 3. Wanrenne ; and 4. Mowbray: No. 299, 
Chap. XXVIII., and No. 394, PL XXXVIL; also see pages 38 
and 153. 

II. The DiSFOsmoN and Agoroitpment of two or more Shieijis 
OF Arms, so that thet shall form and coNSTrruTE a single 
Heraldic CoMPOsmoN. 

In many cases, Marshalling requires that Shields of Arms 
should retain their individual characteristics, while they also 
have to form associations with other heraldic compositions. 
This is effected by grouping together the allied shields. • 

Knights of the Oarier, the Bath, and other Orders, if married, 
bear two Shields. On the first, placed to the dexter, are the 
paternal Arms of the Knight himself, being surrounded with the 
Insignia of his Order of Ejiighthood. On the second shield he 



MABSHALUNG AND INHERITANCE. 169 

bears his own Arms repeated, without any E^ghtly Insignia, 
impaling those of his wife, or charged with them in pretence ; 
and this second shield is usually encircled with a garland of 
oak-IeaveSy as a decorative accessory only, and without any 
heraldic significance: vine-leaves might be very happily com- 
bined with the foliage of the oak about the sinister half of the 
impaled shield. This EngHsh usage is not followed in Foreign 
Heraldry. See Chap. XXXII. 

Though not customary in actual practice, a similar arrange- 
ment might be adopted, in exact conformity with heraldic rule, 
in the instances of Archbishops and Bishops who are married : 
as it is, in like manner, by the Herald Kings. 

A Peeress in her own Bight bears her hereditary arms (without 
Helm or Crest) on a Lozenge, with her Coronet and Supporters. 
If she be married to a Peer, both her Arms and those of her 
husband are fully blazoned, and the Shield and the Lozenge 
are grouped together to form a single Compound Composition, 
precedence being given to the achievement of the higher rank. 
If she be married to a commoner, her husband changes her 
paternal Arms ensigned with her Coronet, in Pretence upon 
his own; and she also bears her own Achievement of Arms, 
distinct and complete, as she bore it before her marriage : and, 
in this instance also, the Lozenge and the Shield are grouped 
together, the Lozenge yielding precedence. 

If the Widow of a Peer should many a Commoner, she con- 
tinues to bear the Arms of her former husband, as before, on 
a separate Lozenge ; and, on another Shield her second husband 
impales or charges in pretence her paternal Arms, the two 
forming a single group, the shield having precedence. Should 
she many a second peer, she would not retain the Arms of her 
former husband, unless his rank had been higher than that of 
her second husband. 

Boyal Personages^ when married, bear their own Arms, being 
both the Arms of their Dominion and also their Personal Insignia, 



170 



MARSHALLINQ AND INHERITANCE. 



alone on a separate shield, which is placed to the dexter ; and a 
second shield bears the impaled arms of the husband and the 
wife, the arms of the personage of the higher rank being to the 
dexter. In some instances, quartering is used in the second 
shield instead of impalement, — a practice that ought to be 
altogether discontinued. 

Two or more shields may be grouped together by placing 
them upon a mantle of crimson velvet lined with ermine ; or by 
the instrumentality of any such simple accessories as the artist 
may devise. Or it may be sufficient either to place the shields, 
or the shield and lozenge, side by side, or to arrange them in 
such a manner that the shield to the dexter should rest upon the 
dexter chief of the other shield or of the lozenge. 




No. 335 c. Ghamfaqne. 
Seo pp. 135, 15a 

IIL Marshalling the Accessories of any Shield, Lozenge or 
Groqp, is necessarily determined by the circumstances of every 
individual case. 

The Accessories are the Hdm^ Wreath, Cap, Crest-Coronet, Crest, 
Coronet, Crown, Marking, Supporters, Scroll and Motto, Bddges, 
and Knightly or Official Insignia, The several characteristics 
and uses of these accessories having been described in Chapter 



MABSHALLING AND INHERITANCE. 171 

XIY^ their tieatmeht in Marsballing requires but brief 
notice. 

The Hdm always rests upon the Chief of the Shield. Com- 
moneis, Knights, and Baronets have their Crests placed upon 
their Helms, the Crest in eveiy case being sustained by its 
Wreath, Cap, or Crest-Coronet Peers and Princes place the 
Coronet of their rank upon their Helm, and their Crest, duly sup- 
ported, is placed above the Coronet. The Soyebeiqn' places the 
Boyal Crest above the Imperial Crown The ManUing always 
falls, or is displayed, from the back of the Helm. The ScroU 
and MoUo, and also all Badges^ are placed below the shield : but 
should any Motto have a special reference to the Crest, in that 
case such Motto should stand either in chief of the entire achieve- 
ment, or, if only the Crest and the Shield are blazoned, it may 
intervene between them. The Supporters are to be adjusted to 
the shield or lozenge in such a manner that they may appear 
to be in the act of supporting and protecting it. Supporters 
and Crests also admit Marks of Cadency. 

Official Insigida may be associated with any Achievement, in 
such a maimer as may be best calculated to display them witli 
becoming effect Thus, the official staves of the Earl Marshal 
are blazoned and crossed behind his shield. An Official Badge or 
Jewel may be suspended from the shield itself. Other objects 
and devices must determine their own most appropriate display, 
care being taken that the true Heraldic Achievement should 
maintain its own distinct individuality. 

Knighdy Insignia are always associated with Achievements of 
Arms. The Garter and Motto of the Order endrcle the shields 
of all Knights of the Garter; and the Collar, with the " George," 
may also be blazoned about the Garter itself. Knights of the Bath 
encircle their shield with a Bed Biband charged with the Motto 
of the Order, and having the Jewel depending. In like manner, 
the KnighU of the Thistle and of St. Patrick, of St. Michael and of 
St. George, and of the Star of India, place the Bibands of their 



172 



MARSHALLING AND INHERITANCE. 



Orders with their Mottoes, each about his own shield. These 
Bibands are severally Oreen, Sky Blue, Deep Blue with a 
Scarlet Stripe, and Light Blue having edges of White. The 
Badge or Jewel of each Order depends from the Biband. The 
GoUars also of all these Orders may be blazoned about the shield 
of any Knight: and a Knight of more than one Order may 
display the Insignia of each Order. In like manner, aU honour- 
able Insignia of every kind may be displayed in association with 
a Shield or Achievement of Arms. And, in accordance with the 
same rule, Foreign Orders and Insignia may be displayed, pro- 
vided that they have been duly recognized and admitted in this 
country. 




No. 338 A. Shield of John de Hastinos, K.G., Earl of Pembboke, quarter- 
ing De Haatingt and De Valence, and impaling France Ancient and 
England quarterly: from the Monument of Queen Phiuppa, in West- 
minster Abbey. See pp. 160, 161 . 




No. 470. 
Edward I, as Prinob Royal. 



No. 471. 
Henrt of Lancastbr. 



CHAPTER XV. 



CADENCY AND DIFFERENCING. 

By Cadency Heralds diBtrngnish the different individnaLs or 
the seyeral branches of the same family, all of whom, in right of 
their common descent, inherit and bear the same arms. 

DiFFERENGiNQ, as distinct from Cadency properly so called, is 
applied to distingoish the arms of individuals and &amp;milies who, 
without any tie of blood-relationship, are connected through 
Alliance, or who in early times were more or less directly affected 
by Feudal Dependency. This term DiFFERENaNG also denotes 
the secondary charges, by which those shields of arms are dis- 
tinguished that bear the same Ordinances. 

A shield of arms may thus be " differenced," either by modi- 
fying or adding to the original blazon, while retaining its dis- 
tinctive character ; or by introducing upon the shield some fresh 
charge, which is to take no part in the actual composition of the 
arms, but is to have a special and a separate existence of its own 
as a *' Difference." 

The modified shield, when once adopted, would become in 



174 CADENCY AND DIFFERENCINO. 

fact an independent heraldic composition, and would be per- 
manently retained, while yet at the same time it would indicate 
clearly and emphatically both its origin and its alliances. 

The shield, on the other hand, that in its own blazon remains 
unchanged and without even the very slightest modification, 
but is differenced by a " Mark," or " Marks of Cadency," would 
be borne only as a temporary distinction, contingent upon the 
duration or the change of certain conditions; and subsequently 
such a shield would alter its Differences or remove them alto- 
gether, in accordance with the new requirements of advancing 
time. In these changes in the *' Marks of Cadency " which may 
be borne at different times by the same individuals, and in the 
origin of the '* Marks " themselves, the student of Historical 
Heraldry will find lying open before him a wide field for sin- 
gularly interesting and attractive inquir}\ 

Occasionally, more than one Mark of Cadency or Difference 
appear in the same shield ; and it also was a practice habitually 
prevalent with the early Heralds to difference their IHfferenceSy 
that is, to charge one Mark of Cadency or Difference upon 
another. . 

I. 1. The former of the two 'processes for Differencing Arms 
may be effected, first, by changing the Hnehtre either of the field, 
or of the ordinary, or of any other charge, in any Heraldic Com- 
position ; or by simply reversing the tinctures of the field and the 
ordinary and other charges. 

Thus, in the time of Henry IH,, the two Furnivals appear 
bearing, the one "upon a field of gold, and tlie other upon a field 
of silver, the same red bend and the same six martlets also red. 
This shield, Na 365, Plate XXY., is repeated in the curious 
monument to a lady of the same family in Selby Church, York- 
shire. At the same period the brothers De la Zoughe severally 
bear gtdes, hezardee, and azure, bezantee. No. 366. The De la 
ZoucHEs subsequently further difference their shield by intro- 
ducing a canton ermine, as appears in the Brass to Lady 



CADENCY. 



CHAFTEK XV. 



DE LA ZOUCHE 



DE BREWYS. DE LA ZOUCHE. 







\' 




DE BALLIOL 



DALTON. 



DE SEGRAVE. 








OUCHTRED. 



CLYNTON. 



OITTRICH. 



« 







TAlJCOltBE 




DE WARRE 



PAYNELL. 




^^^ 



riav Lxvn 



CADENCY AND DIFFERKNCING. 176 

WiLLOUGHBY DE Eresbt, a.ix 1391, at SpiLsby in Linoolnshire, 
No. 366 a ; and also by charging their shield with a label azure^ 
a chevron ermine, No, 366 b, Plate LXVII., and a hend org. (Boll 
Edw. II., 1808-1314) ; and again, by adding a chief ermine, (EoU 
Rich. IL). 

Sir John de Harcourt, a Banneret, in the tune of Edw. II. 
bears, or, two bora gu. ; and at the same period a second Sir 
John de Harcourt, of Leicestershire, reverses these tinctures, 
and bears, gu., tuH&gt; bars or. The Boll of Edw. III. gives for 
'' Monsire Le Strange, Bare de Knocking," gu., two lions pasaani 
org., and adds that '^ Monsire Le Strange de Blackmere port le 
revers^* — carg., two liona pass, gu. : and again, in the same Boll, the 
Lord Moulton of Gilsland bears, org., three bars gu., and the Lord 
MouLTON of Frankton " le reoera.'* 

The De Oenevillgs, Seigneurs de Brotes, bear, the elder bro- 
ther, aa., ihree breya or bamaclea in paie or, and on a chief erm. a 
demi-lion rampt. iaauant gu.. No. 131 a, Fl. XIY. : and the younger 
differences the same arms by simply changing the tincture of the 
field of his shield from aable to azure ; (Bolls H. III.) These 
arms of the De Oenevilles may be considered to exemplify the 
compounding two distinct coats. The Mortimers difference by 
changing the tincture of their inescutcheon from argent to ermine, 
Nos. 99 and 99 a, p. 31 ; Hugh de Mortimer, of Chelmarsh, sub- 
stitutes gulea for the azure of the original shield ; and (Boll Edw. 
II.), BoGER and John de Mortimer severally charge their silver 
inescutcheons with a aaUire gulea, and a lion rampt. purpure. The 
change from argent to ermine for the tincture of the field was fre- 
quently adopted, as by the Montagutes ; or for the tincture of an 
ordinary, as in their chevron by the Berkelets. Again, (Boll 
E. IL), Sir OiLES DE Brewts bears, org,, cruailie, a Uon rampt. queue 
fourchee gu. ; and Sir Bichard differences this same shield by 
charging his lion and his crosslets on a field ermine. No. 390 a, 
PL LXVII. Sir Wm. de Brewys bears, az., cruaUSe, a lion rampt. 
or, thus changing both the original tinctures ; ^nd another Sir 



176 CADVJXCY AND DIFFERENCING. 

William differences this last shield by chaTging a fleur-de-lifs 
gules upon the shoulder of the lion. Sir John de Bbewts, (temp. 
E. in.), introduces another slight modifioation ; he l^ears, az., 
cruaUee^ a lion rampL or^ crowned amd armed gu,^ (Calais Boll, a.d. 
1347); and, seventy-five years later, the same shield, No. 390, 
PL XXXYIL, is six times repeated in the Brass to another John 
de Brewts, at Wiston in Sussex. In the Calais Boll a second Sir 
John de Brewts appears, who differences simply by bearing his 
lion without a crown. Sir William Fitz Waryn, or Fitz 
Warren bears, quarterly, per fease indented^ arg. and gu., and Sir 
John differences this shield with a label of three points azure, 
(Calais Boll) ; but the Garter-Plate of Sir William Fitz Waryn, 
E.6., (died 1362), changes the argetU for ermine. The arms of 
De Bos appear varied in their tinctures in the following manner ; 
gu.y three water-bougeis org.. No. 374, PI. XXVIL; then ermine 
takes the place of argent ; and again, the same charges adkle are 
blazoned on a shield or. This shield of De Bos appears amongst 
the Windsor Oarter-Plates, in the well known efiSgy in the 
Temple Church, and in the Spilsby Brass, and it is also blazoned 
in the early Bolls of Arms ; in the Boll of Bicuard II., William 
DE Bos bears, gu,, three water-hougda arg,, (he first charged with a 
crescent sable. 

The Caerlaverock Boll gives an example of a double change of 
tincture in the banner of John Paignel, a friend and comrade of 
the brothers De Hastings, who bears, vert, a maunche or. The 
Earl himself displays the Hastings banner, or, a maunche gu., 
which his brother Edmond de Hastings differences with a label of 
fivepoinU vert. This Hastings label sometimes appears blazoned 
sable ; it is vert, however, in the Boll of E. II., as in the Caer. 
Boll. WiLLUM Bardolf bears, az., three cinquefoHs or, (Bolls 
H. in. and Caer.), No. 388 b, PL XXVII. Another William 
Bardolf, (Boll of E. II.) bears, az., three cinqurfoils arg.; and 
Thomas and John Bardolf severally bear, or, three cinqurfoils az., 
and gu., three dnquefoUs arg. And, once more, Philip D'Arct 



CADENCY. 



^&gt; 



CHAPTER XVI 



DB aMTTT QUDfTrN. DE IJJ^PHRAVILLE DE SAINT QUINT IN. ^ 



|jj::i|jj::ij|j: 




i A/ \n,a/ \ /i 



BARDOLr 



rrr« nichoi. 



BARUOLF 




&lt;&amp; «5a «© 



DER08. 



I&gt;£ BAUilOL. 



d'akcy 



^ ^ ^ ^ 




b'arcy: 



D ARCY 



D'ARCY 




PJat.c XXVII 






CADENCY AND DIFFERENCING. 177 

bears, arg,^ three roses gu. (Bolls H. III., and E. II.) : in the 
Calais Boll this shield is blazoned for Sir John D'Arcy, org,, three 
einqttrfoUs gu. William D*Arct differences his shield to, gu., three 
roses org. (Boll E. II.) ; Bobert D'Arcy bears the red roses upon 
silyer within a hordure indented sable ; Norman, instead of this 
bordnre, differences the same shield with a Idbd of three points 
axure ; and John bears, 02., Crusoe, three roses org. (Boll E. II.). 
I must reserve for future consideration other differenced shields 
of both the D'Arcibs and the Bardolfs. (See pp. 181, 182.) 

2. Secondly retaining the identity of the tinctures, the Cadency 
and Differencing may be effected by introducing some fresh 
charge, of at least a comparatiyely subordinate character, and in- 
corporating it with the original composition of any shield ; or, by 
slightly varying the charges that are borne on any shield ; or, by 
substituting one chaise for another under like conditions ; or, by 
associating with one heraldic composition the distinctive insignia 
of another in such a manner that, while the original design may pre- 
dominate, the presence of the allied arms may readily be recognized. 

In the great majoriiy of instances the minor charges of shields 
were imquestionably introduced with a view to "Cadency," 
while less frequently these same charges may be considered 
to have appeared in blazon simply for the purpose of " Differ- 
ence :" and, accordingly, in either case Heraldry appears to have 
derived the most popular associates of its Ordinaries from its own 
early efforts, more sua, to distinguish and also oftentimes to con- 
nect the different bearers of those simple insignia. When not 
derived from an allied shield, the firesh charges introduced by 
the early Heralds for marking Cadency or for Differencing do not 
appear to have been selected upon any definite principle, unless, 
indeed, the idea of a Bebus may be supposed whenever practicable 
to have been recognized as possessing a paramount claim. Small 
Crosses were evidently held in especial esteem ; and, in some 
cases, devices used as Badges may have been adopted for Dif- 
ferencing. These fresh charges are placed either upon the field 



r 



178 CADENCY AND DIFFERENCING. 

of the Shield itself or upon the Ordinary, and in the earliest ex- 
amples they are almost invariably many times repeated. As a 
matter of necessity, these charges would be drawn to so small a 
comparatiTe soale, that their presence would not very seriously 
affect the primary idea of the original composition. When set 
upon the field of any shield, the small charges at first appear 
poudree or semSe over the entire area, or arranged to form an orle^ 
or as the old Heralds wrote it, an ourle or urle—thm orle or urle 
being a modification of the bordure : the term *' urle " is used in 
the Roll of H. III., but poudree does not occur till the time of 
E. IIL, and sem^e is even later : the treatment which we now 
describe by one or other of these terms poudree and aem^e, is thus 
blazoned in the Roll of H. III., for Rauf le Fitz Nicole, who 
bore, gu,, semee of escallops arg,y a cinquefoil or,— ^^de goules ung 
guirUefueil de oty le champ pleyn des escaUopes d' argent.*^ At a later 
period, the numbers of the smaller charges are generally reduced 
so as not to exceed six, and they are disposed in some regular 
order; and thus, being also drawn on a larger scale, these 
secondary charges become component members of the heraldic 
composition in which they appear. Later still — ^that is to say, 
about the middle of the fourteenth century — single small charges 
begin to be used, under special circumstances, ** for Difference." 
The idea of differencing shields of arms by means of small 
charges again and again repeated, may possibly have been 
suggested by the early practice of Diapering ; but, whatever its 
origin, this system of marking Cadency from the first is alto- 
gether distinct from any merely decorative accessories. It will 
be understood, that the term "Cadency" applies only to the 
differencing of the shields of several members either of the same 
family or of different branches of the same family : at the same 
time it is obvious that by a change of tinctures, by fresh combi- 
nations and dispositions, and by the introduction of various minor 
charges, a series of shields all bearing the same Ordinary may be 
effectually ^' differenced " for different families who may be allied 



CADENCY. 



H.--.'':i:K XV' 




DE LA ZOUCHE NE-WBT'RGH 



oooo 
ooo 




REAUCUAMP BK AU C ILAMP 



fcjL*J 



4&gt;#"#&gt; 




t BEAU CHAMP. 




ClilFFORD. 



CUFTOHD. 





\ 








\ 




\ 




— 




\ 




\ 




\ 




y 


3 


1 




\ 


^N 




L&gt; 



CQBHAM. 




COBHAM 




PI .J. yvy 



CADENCY AND DIFFERENCING. 179 

without any blood relatiomjliip, or between whom there exists no 
alliance whatever. True *• Cadency/' I may add, if traced up 
to its source, will be found in the greater number of instances to 
imply a certain degree of Marshalling. 

3. In the first Boll of Henrt III. four shields of Beauchamp 
are blazoned : of these, one is simply votr^e — a second is quarterly 
org. and «a., — a third charges a bend gu, upon afidd quarterly arg. 
and of the firsts and the fourth is «a., an eagle displayed arg.y armed 
or. The well known shield of the Beaughahps, Earls of 
Warwick, (No. 370, PI. XXV.), accordingly does not appear in 
this group; but the Boll gives the shield of De Newburoh, Earl 
of Warwick, cheques arg. and az., a chevron erm., No. 367, PL XXV. 
The shield vairie is repeated in the Caer. and the Calais Bolls, 
and in the Boll of Bichard II. In the Caer. Boll also the arms 
of Guy Beauchamp, Earl of Warwick, are blazoned, gu., semSe of 
crosdeiSy a f esse or, No. 368 ; and a third banner of Beauchamp, is 
gtL, a f esse between six marUets or. No. 369, PL XXV. The cross- 
lets were reduced to the same number, six, early in the fourteenth 
century (BoU E. I.). In the Elsyng Brass, a.d. 1347, in the 
Beauchamp monuments at Warwick, in the Calais Boll and the 
BoU of Bichard II., and in the Garter-Plates, the Beauchamps, 
Earls of Warwick, bear the six golden crossUis, No. 370. Sir John 
de Beauchamp, E.G. brother of the Earl, differences his shield by 
charging a crescent sable upon his fesse, No. 371, (Calais Boll); 
and (Boll of Bichard II.), somewhat later, Wm. de Beauchamp 
does the same, while the Earl quarters Beauchamp {crosslets) and 
Newburgh. The shield with the six martlets is repeated for Sir 
Walter de Beauchamp, and wUhin a hordure indented arg. for Sir 
Wm. de Beauchamp, in the Boll of Edw. II. ; without any dif- 
ference it appears, for Sir Giles, in the Calais Boll ; in the Boll 
of Bich. II., BooER de Beauchamp differences the same shield with 
a MuUel sable pierced, charged upon the fesse : and it is also 
charged with a label azure for an eldest son. Upon a monument, 
about A.D. 1400, in Worcester Cathedral, this martlet shield of 

n 2 



180 CADENCY AND DIFFEBENCINa. 

the Beauchaups is very effectively blazoned (in this monnment 
the effigy of the lady has the head resting upon a swan of ample 
size), and also in the Brass of the same period to Sir Nicholas 
Dagwobth, at Blickling in Norfolk. In other shields of the 
members of different branches of this family, six crescents^ or the 
same number of hiUets, all of gold, are blazoned with a golden 
fesse upon a red field. 

The Cliffords, who bear ehequee or and az,, a hend gu.^ in the 
Koll of Henry III., No. 372, PI. XXV., at Caerlaverock display a 
fesse in place of the bend. No. 373 ; and, subsequently, they 
charge on their bend Aree lions of England. The Cobhams bear, 
gu., a chevron or. In the Calais Boll this shield, without doubt 
the original shield of his family, is assigned to Sir John de 
CoBHAM, but ¥rith the addition of a silver labd. A second Sir 
John de Cobham bears, gu.^ on a chevron or, three lioncds rampi. 
«o.. No. 377, PI. XXV. : Sir Bbginald differences by substituting 
three estoUes pierced, of the same tincture, for the three lioncels. 
No. 379 : another Sir John, a.d. 1420, chaiges his gclden chevron 
with ihree eaglets sable '(Collections of Nich, Charles, p. 158, in Coll. 
Arm.) : and other Cobhams carry out the system by severally 
charging their chevron, which is always golden, with either 
ihree crosdets, or three fleurs de lys, or three crescents, or ihree mari^ 
lets, aU saSOe ; (Calais BoU, Boll of B. 11., Seals, Canterbury 
Cloisters Shields, Brasses at Cobham in Kent and Chrishall in 
Essex, and Brass to Sir John de Harpedene at Westminster). 
Bauf de Cobham adds an estoUe, for a secondary Difference, wiA 
his crosslets. No. 378, PI. XXV. ; (Brass at Cobham, A. d. 1402). 
In another Boll of Edw. m., a fourth John de Cobham is said 
to have borne " gules, sur vne chevron d!or, trois estoUes de saUe, 
enlre trois lis le asur ;" the azure of the fleurs de lys here is pro- 
bably a mistake of the transcriber of the original MS. for argenL 
I must add that in the Boll of Bich. II., a Thomas de Cobham 
bears, gu,, a cross org. 

Orosdets were evidentiy the fietvourite charges for marking 



CADENCY AND DIFF£R£NOING. 181 

early Cadency ; some other forms of small crosses also frequently 
occur. And MarUeU and MuUda appear to have been held in 
esteem as Differencing Changes, in a degree inferior only to 
that accorded to Crosslets. In the Boll of Henry III., Piers 
DE Brewts bears, arg.^ a lion rampi. az. ; but Wm. de Brewys 
changes this to, &lt;u., cruaUde^ a lion rampt. or,^ as I have already 
shown, p. 175. The De Baluous difference, ^, an arte org, in 
a remarkable manner, No. 645, PI. LXVII., by placing in the 
dexter chief a small amre inescutcheon charged with a lion rampt. 
crowned or ; and secondly they difference by simply modifying 
the original blazon to az^ semee of crosaea crosdetSy an orle or^ 
No. 376, PL XXVII. In his Brass, aj). 1275, Sir Eooer de 
Trumpinodon (also Boll E. I.) bears on his shield, a«., crwUee^ 
two trumpets in pile or. No. 375, PI. XLYIII. : Sir Giles de 
TRUMPiNaTON repeats the same arms, somewhat later, (BoU E. U.) 
(See also early stained glass at Tmmpingdon). Upon his 
ailettes and upon small escutcheons upon his sword-scabbard Sir 
BooER adds a label of three points, thus corroborating the evi- 
dence borne by his shield to show that the engraving of this 
interesting Brass was never completed. The aims of De Lucy 
are, &lt;)«., three hciee haurieiU in fease org. (Boll H. III). This 
shield is differenced by substituting or for org,, and powdering 
the field with croedeta first of silver and then of gold. Six 
shields are blazoned, each with a aingle cinqu^oU, in the Boll of 
Henry IIL Of these one bears the charge of aUver and another 
of gdd, on a red field. Fitz Nighol retains the gold and red 
tinctures, but powders his field with rilver eacaUopa, No. 388, 
PL XXVII. On a field aaUe, De Faucombe bears both the 
dnqurfoU and an orle rf marUeta org.. No. 390 a. De [Jmphraville 
adheres to the original tinctures, but adds a hordure az,, aemie of 
haraeahoea or. No. 388 a. Thomas Bardolfh has an azure shield, 
cruaUSe and with the cinqurfoU or — ^his elder brother, William 
Bardolpu bearing, as I have already shown, az,, three cinquefoila 
or — No. 388 b. In addition to the shields of his own house, 



182 CADENCY AND DIFFERENCING. 

Thomas de Saint Quintin, a.d. 1445, at Harpham in his Brass, 
has a shield charged with the arms of Thomas Babdolph, 
No. 388 c, PL XXVII. ; in this example the orosslets are drawn 
flearie. No. 388 d, PI. XLVIII. At Trumpington, Elsyng, 
Warwick, Cobham, and in the earlier Stall-Plates at Windsor, 
the crosslets are hoUmde — No. 388 e, PI. XLVIII. : this appears 
to be the favourite manner of rendering this popular charge, 
though in many instances its points are cut off square, as in 
No. 83, PL in. The shield of Sir Amorye D'Arcy, in the Calais 
Boll, bears carg.y toithin an orle of cinquefaUs^ an inescutcheon gu,. 
No. 388 F, PL XXVI., and, in the same Boll, Sir William 
D'Arct differences this shield to az,, ervsiUe, three cinqu^aUa arg,y 
No. 388 H. Other D'Arcies bear, arg.^ three aiafoUsgu.; and 02., 
crusUee^ three sixfoUa org.. No. 388 i : and, for farther difference, 
arg.j within an orle ofsiafoHa gu., an inesculcheon «a., No. 388 g. A 
monument of the Caerlaverock period at Howden in Yorkshire, 
to a De Saltmarsh, displays a shield, crusiUe, charged with three 
sixfoils. No. 389 ; this shield is blazoned, arg.^ crtuHee three rotes 
gu,, (Roll B. 11). In their noble Brass at Little Horkesley in 
Essex, A.D. 1412, the shields of the Swynbornes, No. 391, PL 
XXXVII.; are, gu., crvsHee, three hoar's heads couped org. ; the 
same shield is blazoned in the Boll of Henry III., and the Boll 
of BiCHARD II. Thomas Swynborne differences it with a label of 
three points or, while a William Swynborne bears, per f esse gu. and 
arg^ three roses cotmterchanged, seeded or. A shield semSe of qua- 
trefoHs, with a wild boar, (sangUer,) in chief, appears in the Brass 
to Sir Thomas Massyngberde, a.d. 1405, at Gunby, in Lincoln- 
shire. Sir John Comyn bears, arg,, crusUee three garbs gu. 
(Boll E. II). Sir Thomas Dalton bears, 02., crusUSe or, a lion 
rampt. guard, arg.. No. 391 a, PL LXVII. (Calais Boll and 
Boll E. II.) Bawdwyn Beresforde (Boll B. II.), bears, org., 
three fleurs de lys, two and one, between mi crosslets fiichSes sa. John 
Warue, Bicuari) Louel and Geoffrey Hauteville severally 
bear, gu., crusilec, a lion rampt. arg. ; or, critsilcc, a lion rampi. az. ; 



C A D JE X C Y . 



ChVAPTLK X\^] 



DE SALTMARSH. DE BREWTS DE SWTJfBORlfE. 




D£ BEHKEXiEY DC BERKELEY 



HOWARD 




TrRrMSTONE. 



GKEVILL.E. 



CLYTTTOK. 



^^j^ 





^ 1^^ 



«!» oi|« &lt;»lc&gt; 




DF. BASSETT 



DE BASSETT. 



W 






Hi Hi 





H M HI 




Piaie xxxvt; 



CADENCY AND DIFFERENCING. 183 

and, «a., erwUSe or, a lion rampt, arg.^ No. 391 b., PL LXVII. 
In the Boll of E. I., Joun de la Wa&amp;be bears the same shield ; 
but WiLUAM DE Wabbe bears, gu., a lion rampi. queue fourchSe 
arg.y over aU a hendlet m. The red shield of the Berkelets, with 
their chevron yarioosly tinctured, appears in the early Bolls 
powdered with either silver crosses pattSes^ stiver crosses crosdets, 
saver dnqurfoils, or silver roses, Nos. 392, 393, PL XXXYII. 
(See the shield and jupon of the effigy in Bristol Cath., Seals, 
Roll B. I., and CoUections of Nicholas Charles, p. 228, in Coll. 
Arm.) The Berkeley shield is farther differenced with either a 
label cusure or a hordure argent ; and in the Boll of H. III. Mau- 
rice DE Babkele bears simply, gu., a cheveron org, I am not 
able to show that as a Berkeley originally bore a silver chevron 
without any other charge, so a Howard once bore a silver bend 
alone upon a field gales ; but I see no reason for doubting that 
the Howard of an earlier time than that of Ed. II. placed the 
crosses crosslets upon the well known shield of his house for 
Difference : the blazon of this shield is, gu,, a hend between six 
crosslets fitcUes carg. No. 394, PI. XXXVIL See Chap. XXYHI. 
and No. 613. At Checkenden, Bucks, the spirited effigy of a 
mail-dad De Montfort exhibits the remarkable shield of that 
family differenced with crosslets fitch^es : it may be thus bla- 
zoned, gu,, crusHee fitchSe, a lion rampt. queue fourehSe arg., preying 
on an infant ppr. ; in this example the sculptor has represented 
the lion facing to the sinister, No. 399, PL XLIX. In the Boll 
of E. II., the De Montfort Crosslets are not fitch^es. And, once 
more, the shield of the Botilers, Barons of Wem, affords another 
example : it is, gu,, between six crosses patSes fittMes org,, a fesse 
counter-componSe so. and of the second. 

4. In one of the Bolls of H. III., the red pile of Ghandos 
appears differenced with muUets : this shield. No. 127, PI. VI., 
is, or, a pile gu., charged with three mullets of six points gold, between 
08 many others of (he second. In the Calais Boll, William Cltnton, 
Earl of Huntingdon, bears org., six crosslets JUchees sa., and on a 



184 CADENCY AND DIFFERENCING. 

chi^ az., two muOeU or. No. 400, PL XXXVII. : but Thomas 
Glynton retains a simpler shield, org., on a chief az.^ two mvUeU of 
six points or^pierced gu., and he adds over all, a label of three jpoints 
erm., No. 400 a, PL LXVII. At Gaerlaverock, the brothers 
BassetT, who both bear, erm., a chief indented gu., difference their 
shields by severally charging their chiefs with three muUeta and 
three escaUope or, Nos. 402, 403, PL XXXVII. The earliest 
known seal of the Douolasses, the secretum of William, Lord 
Douglas, a.d. 1296, bears simply, arg., on a cJiief ass, ikree muUets 
of the field : the Boyal Heart first appears on the field of the 
shield, A.D. 1355, on the seals of William, first Earl Douglas ; 
and the Heart is ensigned *with a Crown, a.d. 1617, on the seal of 
WiLUAM, eleventh Earl of Angus: the five shields upon the 
monument of the Countess of Lennox, at Westminster, a.d. 1577, 
have in pretence the Douglas shield bearing the three mullets 
and the heart without a crown; the (rarter-Plate of James, 
Earl Douglas, K.G., however, displays the crowned heart : See 
No. 177 A, PL XIV. (See Seton, p. 224.) The St. Johns, in 
like manner, bear mullets on a chief. John de St. John, org,, 
on a chief gu., two muUeU or; and his son, John the younger, 
differences this shield with a label of five points azure ; Nos. 404, 
404 A, PI. XXVIII. Another John de St. John, instead of 
the label, differences with a bordure indented so. ; Hoger changes 
the tincture of the field from argent to ermine; and another 
brother of the same house bears, arg^, crunlSe ea,, on a chirf gu, 
two mullets or, (Boll E. II.). Sir Edmond Baooun modifies the 
St John shield thus, gu., on a chief org,, two mullets sa. The three 
shields which follow are blazoned in the first HoU of H. UI. : 
B. DE Shastone, gu,, on a bend org,, three mullets az,; B. de 
Moelles, arg,, two bars, and in chief as mamf mullets gu, ; and 
Wiluam D'Odingseles, arg,, a fesse, and in chief two mullets gu. 
In the Boll of Ed. I., the mullets of William D*Odingseles have 
six points, and his brother has a single mullet only. In this same 
Boll, the shield of Bauf Daubeny is blazoned, gu., four fusils 



CADENCY 






GRAHAM. 




J)E RArHKCOlTRTR DK BEAlTMC)iTrrE. DE PC) TEN HALL 







I 





CADENCY AND DIFFERENCING. - 185 

conjoined in fesse org., No. 405, PI. XXVIII. (See also the fiame 
shield upon the pommel of the sword-hilt of Sir Giles Daubeny, 
K.G., in Westminster Abbey, a.d. 1507.) In the year 1345, 
a monumental slab was scnlptured and placed at Norton Brise 
in Oxfordshire, to commemorate Sir John Daubygn^. It is a 
veiy remarkable composition in every respect, and singularly 
interesting in its Heraldry. Fonr of its five shields are charged 
with the arms of Daxtbygn:^. Of these one bears, two chevrons 
toUhin a hordure engraUed ; in the Boll of Henry IEL, Wiluam 
Daubeny bears, or, tvoo chenfrona wUhtn a hordure gu. The second 
of the Norton Brise shields bears Daubygni^ as in the Boll of 
Edward L, No. 405, PL XXYIU. ; the third shield charges each 
fusU toUh a pierced muUet ; and the fourth bears the fusils erm,^ 
with the addition of ihree rnuOets in ehi^. No. 406. Philip 
Daubeny bears, ^ee marUets above his silver fusils ; No. 408 a ; 
and Elys differences by simply charging an azure hendlei over 
all. At p. 134 I give a representation of the achievement of 
Sir John DaubygniT, No. 408, drawn from the original monu- 
ment ; he himself is thus seen to bear the shield, No. 407 ; his 
Crest is a pierced mullet within a wreath of olive-leaves, and his 
MunfliTig ifi also powdered with pierced muUets. Again, Sir 
Thomas Ughtred' bears (Calais Boll), gu.^ on a cross fleurie or^ 
five mullets so.. No. 401, PL XXKYIt This shield is differenced 
as follows : by Sir Bobebt Ouctbed (Boll E. U.), or, on a cross 
paUee gu,, four mullets of the field. No. 401 A, PI. LXVIL ; and by 
Thomas OrrrBiCH (Boll B. 11.), gu,, on a cross jpatonce or, five 
mvUeU of six points pierced of the field. No. 401 b, PI. LXVII. 

In the first and fourth quarters of his shield, the present Earl 
of Vebulam bears, org,, on a fesse so., three muUets of six points or, 
pierced gu,^ in the dexter chief an ermine spot for difference. This 
shield, No. 395, PI. XXXVH. is engraved on a brass plate with 
an inscription to Sir Edward Gbimston, in Bishangles Church, 
Suffolk, a.d. 1599 : also Boll Bighard II. The Les Despensers 
charge their bend, No. 107, PI. V. with ihree muUets, for Differ- 



186 CADENCY AND DIFFERENCING. 

ence, and they also engrail the bend itself^ (Cahus Boll). In 
like manner, in the year 1337, William de Bouun, Earl of 
NoBTHAMPTON (afterwards a Knight Founder of the Garter), 
differenoes his paternal shield by chaiging upon the silver bend 
three muUets of nxpoinU. In the Calais Boll these mullets are 
blazoned guiea, but they are also elsewhere tinctured edble. The 
shields of this renowned Baron and of his son, both drawn from 
their seals, are placed side by side in Plate XX., Kos. 397, 398. 
It will be seen that in No. 398 the coUaes are better developed 
than in the shield of the earlier Humphbet de Bohun, No. 201, 
the father of the Earl of Northampton. The shield of the Db 
BoHUNS, both with and without a label, is blazoned in the Bolls 
of Henby III., Edw. I., and Caerlaverock ; it occupies a foremost 
place amidst the Stall-Plates of the Knights of the Garter, 
No. 629, PI. LXVI. ; it yet lingers over what remains of the 
once honoured burial-place of jtheir powerful &amp;mily, the Llan- 
thony Abbey, founded by themselves near Gloucester; it ap- 
pears, finely sculptured, both alone and impaling Fitz Alan and 
Warrenne, in places of distinguished honour at Canterbury; 
and it occurs repeatedly in the Heraldry of both Seals and 
Monuments — as in the Seals of Henby IV. and Thomas of Wood- 
stock his ill-fated imcle, and also in those of the Staffobds, Dukes 
of Buckingham, in the Brasses at Westminster, Spilsby, and 
Exeter, and the Beauchamp Chapel monument at Warwick. 

5. The MarUeU that are charged upon the shield attributed to 
the Confessob, No. 78, PI. I., have been assumed by Mr. Planch^ 
to have been derived from the impress of the pennies of the last 
Saxon Edwabd, which are stamped with a plain cross between 
four doves. (See Pursuivant of Arms, p. 93, where one of these 
coins IB figured.) This shield of St. Edwabd, which appears at 
the head of the fine early series in Westminster Abbey, may 
have suggested the adoption of the MarUet as a Differencing 
charge. The Fubnivals, whether at a still earlier period they 
did or did not bear their bend alone, in the Boll of H. III. 



CADENCY AND DIFFERENCING. 187 

appear differencing with martlets. (See p. 174, and No. 865, 
PL XXV.) The Loutebels a|id the Mounteneys, also early 
bearers of bends, in like manner associate martlets with their 
Ordinary : thus, Sir Andrew and Sir Geoffrey Loutebel severally 
bear, or^ a bend between six martlets sa.y and arg,, a bend between six 
marUels sa. ; Sir Ernauf Mountenet bears, as., a bend between six 
martlets oVj which one Sir John further differences with a mullet 
gu. charged upon the bend, while a second Sir John blazons this 
last combination npon a field gu,^ and a third Sir John upon a 
field gu, bears a bend eotised between six martlets oTj No. 413 c, 
PL LXVIII. ; Roll E. n. The same Roll of E. H. gives for 
Sir Roger Brabazon, gu,^ on a bend or^ three martlets scl^ and for 
Sir Renard le Gros^ quarterly org. and az., an a bend aa., three 
martlets or. The Beaughamps, as I have shown, (p. 179,) differ- 
enced their golden /esse with six marUets : and Sir John de Lacy 
bears or^ a fesse and in chief three martlets gu. : Sir S. de Cheney 
bears the same on Afield argent: and Sir T. Blount bears, gu., 
a fesse between six martlets arg. Again (Roll R« II.), John 
Burdet bears, o^., two bar8 or^ each charged with (hree martlets gu,, 
and John Bagot, org,, a chetfron gu,, between three martlets so. 

Martlets were also commonly borne for Difference so arranged 
as to form an Orle or Bordure, Thus, in the Roll of H. III., 
Roger de Merley bears, barry of six arg. and gu,, a bordure gu. 
charged with marUets or. No. 412, PL XL VIII ; Walter de Fau- 
COMBB bears, so, a cinquefoU vnthin an orle ofmardets org., Nd.'390 b, 
PI. LXYII. ; and Franc de Boun, gu., a crescent within an orle 
of martlets erm.. No. 413, PI. XL VIII. Sir Wm. de Paynel 
bears, org., two bars sa., within an orle of marUets gu., which Sir 
Thos. PAYNEUi modifies by bearing his two bars azure on afield or, 
retaining the orle of martlets unchanged. No. 412 a, PI. LXVII. 
I may here observe that in the original Roll of Edw. II. the 
blazon of the shield of Sir Wm. Paynel describes the martlets as 
*'enla maner de bordure assis.** Again, Sir Wiluah and Sir John 
Vaus bear, arg., within an orle of marUets, an inescuicheon gu. ; and. 



188 CADENCY AND DIFFERENCING. 

gu.j aemSe of marUeta or, and on an inesculcheon geld two liona passant 
azure. No. 413 a, PL LXVIII. Sir Thomas Erpingham, K.G. 
(a.d. 1425)» bears, vert^ an inescuicheon within an orle ofmarHeUarg., 
No. 643, PL LXVHL (Gaxter-Plate, and *« Erpingham Gate " 
to the Cathedral Close, Norwich.) 

The orle of martlets, once more, that is so happily effeotiye in 
the shields of William and Aymer de Valence, No. 101, PL V., 
and PL YII., is another familiar example of the use of this 
favourite charge in early Cadency. The paternal shield of these 
distingaished Barons was simply hamdy (the bars sans nombre) 
org., and az., No. 414, PL XXXVni. This shield was once 
blazoned upon the Westminster Monument, and it is still pre- 
served in connection with the curious semi-efiSgy of Ethelmer or 
Aymer de Valence, brother of Earl Willllm, Bishop of Win- 
chester, in Winchester Cathedral. I have engraved this relic in 
my *' Christian Monuments." Upon this shield a label gtdes is 
charged, for an eldest son. No. 415 — the arms of the Counts of 
LusiGNAN. Then, upon the barruly field there is introduced — 
possibly to compound two Coats of Arms— a lion rampL gu., 
crowned or, — No. 416. The orle of red mar&amp;ets succeeds, No. 101 ; 
and at the same time, three crowned lumcels of the same tincture 
modify the Difference effected by the single lion. No. 417 : this 
last shield, No. 417, remains in the Westminster Monument, the 
original enamel being still fresh and brilliant And, once more, 
Guy, tbB younger brother of Willdlm de Valence, bo far alters 
the shield of his house, that he bears, org., (hree bars az, over all a 
bendlet gu. : I add this shield, No. 418, to complete the De 
Valence group, in which the student will observe that the 
tincture, gules, is retained in all these shields for their varied 
Differences. The Count De Bochefoucault, who was descended 
from the Lusignan family, bears, harry often org, and az,, three 
chevronels gu. Another group of shields, three in number, may be 
associated with the shields of the De Valences, in order to ex- 
emplify more fully their system of marking Cadency : these are 



GADEKCY. 



rHAPTEB XVi 



DE VALENCE. DE VALEVCE. DE VALENCE. 




DE YALEXCE. BE VALENCE D£ VALENCE. 




DE CHJO/fOnrV. I&gt;K CHAWORTH. DE CHAWORTH. 



-%i^^^.«r-%«. 



^^.^ ^ 



f^^= W 



^S 





BB RYTHEB . 



PARYS. DE FRE8SEL. 



yy 





¥jt¥ 



L 



Plate J XX".': 



CADENCT AND DIFFERENCING. 189 

the shields of the De Chawobths, which severally are blazoned, 
hamdy org. and gu., an orle ofmarUeU sa, ; then tJaree fnarUets^ two 
and one, m., take the place of the orle ; and, finally, a hendlet 
snpersedes the martlets altogether; Nos. 419, 420, and 421, 
Plate XXXYIII. (See Aspilogia, I. 55, and PhiUpot (mnllet) 
p. 55, in Coll. Arm.) In the Boll of Edw. II., Sir Patrick 
Ghawobthe bears, harry or and az.^ an orle ofmarUeU sa, (See 
Chap. XVL, " Cadency of the De Beaufobts.) 

6. The always beautifhl Flew de lys appears as a Differencing 
chai^ in the blazon of early shields. It wonld seem, indeed, 
that the flenns de lys which are scattered over the field in the old 
arms of France, were designed to mark a difference from a 
kindred shield charged with a single de lys, as, subsequently, 
the shield sefmSe de lys, was differenced by Bordnres, Bendlets 
and Cantons: or, if not thns in itself an actual example of 
heraldic Cadency, &amp;e shield that is so well known as France 
Ancient (No. 2, p. 12,) could not foil to be regarded as eminently 
suggestive, when the Heralds of England for the first time were 
engaged in working out some system of differencing arms. In 
the early examples of France Ancient the fleurs de lys are very 
small, and they are scattered thickly over the field : thus, in the 
shield sculptured in the north choir-aisle of Westminster Abbey 
there are no less than eighteen complete fieurs de lys and parts of 
eight others : another early example of this shield I give in 
Chap. XXIV., Section 1. In the Boll of Henry III., Egbert 
Agxjlon bears, gu,, a single fleurs de lys org. ; and the shield of De 
Tatelow is, gu.^ ihree fleurs de lys or. A remarkable incised 
monumental slab at Abergavenny has a shield charged also with 
three large fieurs de lys. No. 425 a, PI. XXXIX. Vincent (MS. 
SS. in Coll. Arm.) gives the seal of Melicent de Monte Alto {De 
MoniaiuU)y a.d. 1235, with her e£Sgy between two shields, the 
dexter shield bearing a lion rampantj and the sinister shield ihree 
fleurs de lys ; at Stradsett in Norfolk there is a noble monumental 
slab, despoiled of its cross, shields and inscriptions, to Emma, 



190 CADENCY AND DIFFERENCINU. 

widow of RicHAED FiTZ John and of Robf»t de Montault, a.d 
1329, who also displayed upon her seal an interesting heraldic 
combination: (See Art^ued. Journal, XV., 286). Flours delys 
thus borne in small, or comparatively small numbers, as primary 
chains, are not of very frequent occurrence. Wiluam de 
Peyver bears, (Eoll H. III.), arg., on a chevron gu., three fleurs de 
lys or, No. 423, PI. XXVIII. This shield is repeated in the Eoll 
of Edw. II. for John de Peyvre, and borne also by Rogeb Peyvbe 
with the chevron azure. John de Deyville (Eoll H. III.) modifies 
this composition to, or, on a /esse gu., three fleurs delys the central 
one reversed gold, No. 424. A second John Deyville (De TuUe) 
(Eoll E. I.) bears, or, on a fesse gu., two fleurs de lys gold, between 
four others of the second. No. 424 a, PL LXVIII. ; and the EoU of 
E. II. repeats this last shield for Johan de Deyville. One of the 
shields in the Selby monument bears three fleurs de lys, all of 
them erect, upon a fesse. No. 425, PI. XXVIII. The Brass to 
Sir John Giffard, a.d. 1348, which has lately been restored to 
Bower Gifford Church in Essex, upon a field beautifully diapered 
bears, six flews de lys, three, two and one. No. 425 b, PI. 
XXXIX. John Neville, (Eoll E. II.) bears, gu., crusiUe, 
three fleurs de lys arg.. No. 424 b, PI. LXVIII. The shield 
of Sir Theobald de Eaghecourte, blazoned in the Calais 
Eoll, displays the singular arrangement of flve golden fleurs 
de lys set in saUire upon a sable fldd. No. 426, PI. XXVIII. 
Eichard Hakebut bears, arg. on a bend cotised gu. three fleurs de lys 
or. No. 426 A, PL LXVIII. Henry de Cobham bears, gu., on a 
chevron or, three fleurs de lys arg. In the Eoll of EiCH. II., the arms 
of John Walsh and Alnack de Anlaby are arg., a chevron between 
three fleurs de lys sa., and, arg., a fesse between six fleurs de lys so. 
Shields not unfrequently have their field fleurettSe or semSe of 
fleurs de lys : thus, the original shield of the Hollands bears, az., 
fleurettSe, a lion rampt. org., No. 637, PI. LXV. In the Calais 
Eoll, Sir Thomas and Sir Otho Holland both bear this shield, the 
former charging the shoulder of his lion with an annulet sable, and 



CADENCY AKD BADGES. 



FITZ RALPH. 



BBOMFLETE 




"-'U:^^ K\:'. 



CADENCY AND DIFFERENCING. 191 

the latter with a orescent of the same tincture, for Difference : (see 
also Ashmole's blazon of the Anns of the Knights of the Garter.) 
The De Beaumonts, in like manner, bear the field of their shields 
gemSe de lys. The arms are, 02., sem^ de lya, a lion rampt. or. An 
example of this coat occurs in one of the shields of the Spilsby 
Brass, Na 427, PI. XXVIII. Other branches of the same family 
change the tinctures to gides and argent, they substitute an orle of 
silver crescents for the field flewrettSe^ and they place over all either 
an caure label or a hendlet componee arg. and gu. In the Calais 
KoU, Sir Thomas Bkaumonte bears the crescents. No. 638, PI. 
LXVIII., and Sir John Beaumonte, the younger, adds a label to a 
similar shield. Again, at a considerably later period (a.d. 1622), 
Lionel, BaronCRANFiELD bears, or, on apode az., three fleursdelys gold. 
The Brass to a Frrz Ealph, at Pebmarsh in Essex, near Clare, 
about A.D. 1320, has a differenced shield of the De Clares, which 
charges each chevronel with three fleurs de lys, and surrounds the 
whole with a hordure : in the Eoll of Edward II. the arms of Fitz 
Ralph are blazoned, or, three chevronds gu., fleurettee org., No. 422, 
PI. XXXIX. In the east window of the south aisle of Uie 
church at Pebmarsh, two of these shields of Frrz Ealph appear 
charged upon panels of rich blue glass, within quatrefoils formed 
of gold and black. Another similar panel contains a correspond- 
ing shield bearing, quarterly arg. and gu.,ona bend sa.,five anmdets or. 
These are very fine examples of Heraldry in stained glass, temp. 
Edward II. (See &amp;\bo Collections of Nicholas Charles, 'p. 139, in Coll. 
Arm.) In the arms of Sir Thomas Bromflete, in his Brass at Wim- 
ington in Bedfordshire, a.d. 1430, the fleurs de lys assume a very 
peculiar position : his shield, No. 426 b, PI. XXXIX., bears, sa,, 
a bend fleurie counter-fleurie or. This shield the Bromfletes further 
difference by charging their bend with three hurtes. This bend 
of the Bromfletes naturally directs the attention of students to tho 
KoYAL Trbssure of SCOTLAND, which is also ^euna counter-fleurie; 
Plates V. and XXII. Lawrence Hameldene (Roll E. II.) uses 
the fleurs de lys for cadency after a different fashion ; he bears, 



192 CADENCY AND DIFFERENCING. 

org., frettSe gu., the frette fleureUie, No. 634, PI. LXVIII. The 
shield of the De Cantelupes, again, furnishes another curious 
instance of the use of the same charges, which have been placed 
in strange association with lion's faces evidently with a view to 
compound two coats of arms. The blazon of this shield, for 
William de Cantelufe at Caerlaverock, is, gu.y hetween three lion'e 
faces jessaml de lys ar^ afease voir : in the KoU of E. I. William de 
Cantelo omits the fesse. No. 426 c, PI. XXXIX. 

7. The arms of Frrz Nichol, No. 388, PL XLVm., are, gu., 
semSe of eecaUop-shelk org., a cmquefoU or ; the original blazon of 
this shield is thus given in the Eoll of H. III. — ^^ de goulea ung 
quintefueil de or, le champ pleyn dee eacdUopea d^argenL** The 
escallop shells appear again upon the shield of De Bigot, who 
bears, or, on a cross gu., five escallops org,. No. 639, PI. LXXI. 
Again, the arms of the De Grahams are, gu., a saUire and chief 
org., ihe latter charged wUh three escallops of the field. No. 409, PL 
XXVIII. In the Eoll of E. II., a Plompton bears, az., five 
fusils in fesse or, each charged with an escallop gu.. No. 640, PL 
LXXI. Earlier in the fourteenth century, Sir Eauf de Hemen- 
HALE bears, or, on a fesse between two chevronds gu., three escallops 
org., No. 641, PL LXXI ; Sir Gilbert le Boon or Bohdn charges 
the bend of the Bohun shield (No. 397, PL XX) with three 
escallops gu., (Eoll of E. III.) ; Henrt Spencer first differences the 
old shield of the Le Despencers in the year 1476 by charging 
three escaUops argent on ihe sable bend, and the arms thus dif- 
ferenced are now borne by both the Duke of Marlborough and 
the Earl Spencer. Again, Sir J. Fastolf, E.G., bears, quar- 
terly or and az., on a bend gu., three escallops org. Sir W. de Acre 
bears, gu., ihree escallops arg., which Sir Edmon differences by 
bearing the field of his shield semSe of trefoils or. No. 642, PL 
LXXI ; (Eoll E. 11.). Again, Thos. de Wennesley bears, erm., 
on a bend gu., ihree escallops or ; Wm. Coosale, org., a cross between 
four escaUops sa, ; Wauter Strtkeland bears, sa., three escallops, 
two and one, arg. ; Wauter Tatlboys bears, org., a saline gu., on a 



CADEXCT. 



._^ yy 



HAMELDENE 




643 

DE BEAVMONTE. 



V^V^V 




(^ ^ ^ 



DEYVILLB. 



^ (A) 9^ 
^ ^ ^ 





*p i.xvni 



CADENCY AND DIFFERENCING. 198 

ehirf of the last three escallops of the field ; and the shield of John 
DE Dabbichecourt displays, erm.y three bars humettie gu,, each 
charged wUh as many escallops or ; Boll B. II. 

8. In his effigy at Byther, in Yorkshire, Sir William de 
Btther, A.D. 1275, bears a shield charged with (hree Crescents^ 
No. 427 A, PL XXXVIII. In the Boll of E. H., another 
WiLLLAU DB BvtHER bears, az.^ three crescents or. Franc le Boun, 
in one of the earliest Bolls, bears the same shield, the tinctures 
being &lt;a., three crescents or. The Brass to Bobert Farts, a.d. 
1408, at Hildersham in Cambridgeshire, is charged with a cross 
flenrie, and has hoo crescents in chief ; No. 427 b. I have already 
given, from the other Boll, for Franc le Boon, a shield charged 
with a single crescent^ within an orle of martlets ; No. 413, Pl.XL. 
Again, in the Calais Boll, John de Potenhall bears, or, on afesse 
org., three increscents of (he field ; No. 428, PI. XXVIII. Sir 
Bobert de Farnham bears, per pale arg, and az., four crescents 
counter-changed; and Sir John de Welle, gu., tnthin a hordure 
ecmponee or and az,y six crescents org. ; (Boll E. II.). Nyool de 
Clyfton bears, «a., on a bend org. three crescents gu., in the sinister 
chief a crescent of the second; and Thos. Cheyne, 02., on a fesse 
nthfdSe^ between three crescents or, afieur de lys gu. ; Boll B. II. 

9. The Berkeleys, as I have already shown, No. 393, PI. 
XXXVII. bore Boses for difference. In the Caer. Boll, the 
banners of the Earl of Laonis or Lothian and his son Patrick of 
Dunbar bear, gu,, a lion rampt., wOhin a bordure org. sem^ of roses 
of Afield, No. 429 a, PI. LXXI., the son adding an azure label. 
No. 429, PI. XXXII. (In the Herald and Genealogist, II., 9 and 
34, attention is directed to the correct rendering of '' Laonis " by 
LoQiian and not Lennox, a correction made by the learned author 
of " Law and Practice of Scottish Peerages'' 1842, p. 988.) Again, 
Simon de Fressel bears, &lt;a., six roses org.. No. 431 ; and (Boll of 
H. in.) Philip D'Arcy bears, aarg,, three roses gu. This shield 
Bobert D'Arcy differences by placing it within a bordure indented 
sable ; Norman D'Arcy substitutes a label for the bordure ; 





194 CADENCY AND DIFFERENCING. 

William oounter-K^hanges the tinctures; and John bears, az^ 
crusilee, three rosea org. ; Nos. 388 e and l, F1. LXXI. ; see also, 
Nos. 388 F, G, H, I, K, PI. XXVII. Rob. Knolles bears, gu.^ on a 
chevron arg.^ three roses of ihe field ; Wm. de Cosyngton, oa., three 
roseSy two and one or ; and BicH. de Bkulee, quarterly org. and gu., 
a rose counter-changed^ seeded or ; Roll R. 11. In ^arly blazoning 
but little difference appears to have been recognized between 
sixfoils and roses. Garlands or chaplets, or roses with or with- 
out leaves, were borne as charges, and they may have done duty 
as Marks of Cadency. At Caerlaverock, Ralph de Fitzwilliam 
bore a banner, harry org. and az., charged with three chaplets of 
roses jppr,; No. 432, PI. XLIX; (also RoU E. H.). William 
Bassett bears, arg,j two bars, and in chirf three chaplets of roses gu, ; 
(Roll E. I.). Another example of a shield bearing three chaplets 
ofrosesy occurs in the Brass to Roger Elmebbigge, a.d. 1430, at 
Beddington in Surrey. This shield, which exemplifies a veiy 
singular manner of drawing the roses, also bears two ehevronds, 
and it has a label of three points ; No. 432 A, PL XLIX. In the 
Brass this shield appears both alone and impaled by Elmebbigge, 
chequSe arg. and sa, ; and, consequently, it is an example of dif- 
ferencing by a label in the arms borne by a lady. 

10. The Deincourts bear, az, hUettSe, a fesse daneeUe or ; No. 
410, PI. XLVm. ; (Rolls of Henry ECL, Edward HI., and Caer.) 
Sir Edmond de Oacelyn, or Oaceline, bears, or, hUeUie az. ; and 
this shield Sir Walter and Sir John difference, the one with a 
laiid of five points gu., and the other with a hendUt gu. ; Roll E. 11. 
The shield of Louvaine, Loveyne or Lovayne is, gu., hiUetiie or, a 
fesse org., and that of St. Omer, az., hiUettSe, a fesse or ; Rolls 
H, m. and E. 11. Roger de Wassingtone (a.d. 1341), on his 
seal displays a shield having the field hiUettSe, and chaiged 
with three swans upon a bend. No. 644, PL LXXI. The seal 
of Rauf de Bulmer, (Roll R n.), bears a lion rampt. on a fidd 
JnOMe; and another shield differenced with billets appears in 
the Brass to John Haydon, at Theddlethorpe in Lincolnshire, 



c A D :e :n c y. 



CHAPTER XV: 




COTJRTENAY. DE BASCRBVIL1.E DE VIPONT 




h'lwte. I 



CADENCY AND DIFFERENCING. 196 

A.D. 1424, the principal charge being a lion passant; No. 411, 
PL XLVKL 

11. The RouNDLES of different tinctures that are charged, for 
Difference, upon Bordnres and Labels, with other Charges borne 
in the same manner and for the same purpose, I reserve to be 
exemplified at the close of this chapter, with the Bordures and 
LabelB themselves. Baundles borne under other conditions do 
not appear so frequently as might have been expected. The 
shields of Courtenat, Deyeheux, and Wake, all bear torteaux, 
and are thus blazoned, (Roll H. m.) : CotTRTENAY, or, three tor- 
teaux ; Devereux, org., a fewe gu,y and in chief three torteaux ; 
Wake, or, two hare gu,, and in chief three torteaua ; No. 437, PI. L. 
At Caerlaverock, Hugh de Courtenay, bore an azure labd charged 
over his torteaux ; and the shield thus differenced has become re- 
cognized as the arms of Courtenay, No. 438, PL L. ; it appears in 
Brasses at Cobham, Exeter, Shillingford, &amp;c., and frequently at 
Canterbury. Bauf ds Camoys bears, or, on a chief gu., three plates, 
(Boll of H. m. andTrotton Brass), Nos. 287, 288, PL XIV. The 
shield of Sir Thomas Latham is, or, on a chief indented az,, three 
plates, (Calais Boll, and Ardeme Monument at Elford, Stafford- 
shire). The early Bolls contain also the following shields ; for 
William de Basgrevill, arg., between three hurtes, a chevron gu,. 
No. 439, PL L. ; which Walter de Bascreville differences by 
charging his chevron with golden crosslets; for Aumery St. 
Amand, or, frettee and on a chief sa., three bezants, No. 436, PL L. ; 
for Bobert de Welle, arg^ two iendlets gu., bezantSe, No. 435; for 
Sir Warren Trussell, arg.,frettSe gu,, thefrette bezantSe, No. 435 a. 
In the Boll of Henry m., Bobert de Estofford bears arg,, a 
chevron gu^ bezantSe ; No. 434, PL L. This shield, slightly modi- 
fied, and having on the chevron three bezants only, appears for 
" Sire Bobert de Esstafforde," in the Edw. II. Boll. As the 
fourteenth century advances, this &amp;mily is known under the 
name of Stafford ; accordingly, in the Boll of Bich. II., " Monsr. 
NiooL. de Stafford" bears, or, a chevronei gu,, and a chief ax. ; and 

o2 



196 CADENCY AND DIFFERENCINO. 

&lt;* Monsr. Eobgrt de Stafford," or^ a chev. gtt.y and over all a hendlet 
az. ; the arms of the head of the House of De Stafford at this 
period being simply oty a chevron gu,y (Calais Boll), which coat 
was qnartered by the Dukes of Bucetnghah in the fifteenth 
century. 

12. Amongst the early Differencing Charges Annulets occa- 
sionally appear. Thus, John de Vipont bears, gu.^ six annuleUor; 
John de Plessis, .arg,y six annulets gu^ No. 440, PL L. ; and Sir 
William de Avenel, arg.^ a f esse between six annulets gu. ; No. 440 a, 
PI. LXIX. At Eilfane, in ELilkenny, the crossed-legged effigy 
of a De CauteVille has on the shield four annulets and a canton in 
relief, the canton being ermine. It is probable that this shield, 
if entirely shown, would have borne six annulets^ 3, 2, and 1 ; 
No. 454, PI. XL., represents what is shown of this shield in the 
original. The Boll of High. II. gives the following blazon of the 
shields of Andrew, John and Bobert de Letke, — the first, arg^^ a 
chief gu., surmounted by a hend engrailed az.; the second, arg.j on a 
saUire engrcaled sa., nine anmdets or ; and the third, org., a chief 
gu.y surmounted by a bend engrailed az.y in the sin. diief a pierced 
mullet or. A Brass in Merton College Chapel, Oxford, a.d. 1471, 
to Warden Henry Sever, bears two shields, both of which are 
charged with a fesse ndmlSe between three annulets. In the original 
blazon, the annulets of De Vipont and De Plessis are described 
as ^*faux rondlets*^ or false roun&lt;22efo— that is, as roundUts voided 
of the Jidd. MasdeSy in like manner, which appear in several 
early shields in groups, are blazoned as '' voydes du champ" when 
they are to be understood to be what we now distinguish as 
mascles : otherwise the early mascle, when not thus voided, be- 
comes the modem lozenge. Shields mascuUe like those sem^ of 
annulets or roundles, or shields charged with mascles in con- 
nection with other charges, may have been intended by early 
Heralds to indicate Difference. 

13. Mr. Planch]^ has directed attention to the seal of William 
de Romare in., Earl of Lincoln, who died as early as 1198, 



CJIDEK CY. ' 



CHAPTER T\^: 




I&gt;B VRRDON. 





^ 






V 


XX 


♦*9.\ 


5 


7 



DB KEVJLLE 
OF SALSBVirr 





WymEl^ANCAflTBR . J&gt;E CiUJTBVILLE. R. DB BA8SETT 




I ULPH.LORDBi&gt;88ET T. DE KENDALL. FITZ MARMADIWE 




ja*e XL 



CADENCY AND DIFFERENCING. 197 

which is both maaculee and cnuiUe, My representation of this 
seal in PL XLV^ is drawn from Mr. Planch^'s engraving. 
Roger de Quincey, Earl of Winchester, bears, gu. mascuUe or : 
and this shield, which is blazoned in the Boll of H. III., appears 
upon the seal of the Earl, and also in the series of early ex- 
amples that yet remain in the south aisle of Westminster Abbey ; 
the mascles, seven in number, are pierced with very small open- 
ings, and disposed over the entire field of the shield, being in 
contact with one another, as in No. 441, PL XLIX. The Boll of 
H. III. also blazons the following shields : for Bichard de Bokele, 
erm,, mascuUe gu, ; for William le Blonde, or^ mascuLee sa, ; and 
for John de Neville, gu,^ masculee or, a canton erm, ; No. 442, PL L. 
The shield of Hubert de Burgh, Earl of Kent, also bears, maa- 
cuUe voir and gu. — " mascuUe de verre et de goulea ;" but this is 
really lozengy vair and gu,, as appears from the shield that is dis- 
played upon the seal of the Earl, and represented in No. 443, 
PL L. This shield is blazoned in all the earliest Bolls. Bobert 
de Tony bears erm., maseidee gu.; (another shield of Tony or 
ToNi is arg.^ a maunche gu.) : John de Bivebs, gu., masculSe or ; 
and William de Ferrers, or, masculee gu., (Caer. Boll). Sir 
Bauf de Ferrers bears this same shield in the Calais Boll ; the 
shield of Bauf de Gorges (Caer.), is lozengy or and az. The Boll 
H. III. gives one example of an Ordinary that is lozengy, in the 
shield of De Vaux — arg., a hend lozengy gu. and of the field ; No. 
444, PL L. The Brass to John de Creke, about a.d. 1320, at 
Westley Waterless in Cambridgeshire, aflFords an early example 
of separate lozenges charged upon an ordinary : this shield bears, 
or, on a /esse gu., three lozenges vair ; No. 445, PL XLVIII. The 
Brass to Sir Peter Arderne, Chief Baron, at Latton, a.d. 1467, 
gives another good example of lozenges ; one of the shields dis- 
played in this memorial bears, paly of six or and gu., on a chief 
arg. three lozenges of the second, the central lozenge charged toith a 
golden chess^ook. No. 448, PL XL.; another shield upon this 
same Brass bears, org., a chevron engrailed, between three chess- 



198 CADENCY AND DIFFERENCING. 

rooke m, Bobebt de Urswike (Boll B. II.) bears, org., on a bend 
M., three lozenges of (he fields each charged vn&amp; a sdUire gu. A field 
or an Ordinary firettSe ifl, apparently, a modified form of represent- 
ing a surface as hzengy. John de Yebdon, (Boll H. III.), bears, or^ 
freUSe gu. ; bnt Sir Bobert de Yerdon, (Boll E. II.) bears, '^de argent ^ 
a une crois de aeuire^ firette de or ;" No. 449, PL XL. In tbe Calais 
Boll, Sir Thomas Hawkestone bears, arg^afe88egu.,freUSe or. 

14. Voir occurs repeatedly in early shields, and it certainly 
bore its part in effecting Difference, by means of varying the 
tincture of any shield or of its charges. Thus, William de 
FoRTiBUS, Earl De Aumale or Albemarle (Boll H. III.), bears, gu.^ 
a cross paionce vairie (Boll H. III., and shield at Westminster.) 
Traces of these arms, emblazoned on the dress of Aveline, 
Countess of Lancaster, the Earl's daughter, are yet visible in 
her efiSgy, a.d. 1274, at Westminster; No. 446, PL L. In the 
same Boll, one De Ferrers bears, vcarSe org. and az.^ and another, 
vairSe or and gu. ; and this last shield is repeated for Sir Bauf de 
Ferrers, of Ghartley, (Calais Boll). Fitz Oboffret bears, qvar- 
terly or and gu.^ toiihin a hordure vairie ; and De Frrz Bauf bears, 
gu.^ a fessie vairSe; (Boll H. III.) One of the early shields of 
the Beauchamps is vairSe; and Sir William Marmion bears, 
Mitr, a /esse gu.^ wUh a labd of three points or ; (Calais Boll). In the 
Boll of H. III., De Monchesney on a golden shield bears three 
small shields, two and one, each of them voir, tot^ two bars gu.^ 
No. 447, PL XL VIII. ; a truly original mode of differencing, 
but one which is at once very clear and very decided. 

I must leave students to seek for other examples of early 
shields, differenced and marked for Cadency, together with ex- 
amples of shields which are charged with other varieties of 
devices and figures for the same purpose. 

The usage of Differencing the Accessories ofShidds of Arms, as 
well as the shields themselves, has already been exemplified in 
the achievement of Sir John Daubygni^, No. 408, p. 134, and in 
several of the interesting mantlings that are blazoned in the 



CADENCY. 



"HAPnT\ x'/: 




,'^ X 



CADESCT ASV DSFTOLESOSG. 199 

Windsor Garter-PlateB; (see MtadUmg, in Cbap. XIH) Crests, 
Sapporten, and Badges are all chaiged with Bifierenoes, pre- 
ciselj in the same manner as MantlingB. In the instance of 
Animalw, the Marks of Cadency are sometimes charged upon their 
shonlden, or ihej are 9emSe with them; and sometimes the 
Marks are fonned into Collars. The lion crest of Thomas Beau- 
FOBT, Duke of Dobbet, is goiged about the throat with a eoOat 
wmponif erm. a»d az^ as the bordnre of his shield ; and the lion 
crest of his &amp;tlier, John Beaufort, K.6., Duke of Somerset, has 
a eoOar eamipamg org. amd as.; No. 451 a, PL XLI. In like 
manner, the shield of Sir Thomas LAircAsrER (Calais BoU), beare, 
gu^ a lion fxmp&lt;. guard, nr^ gorged wUk a eoBar of Yromco — a blue 
collar, that is, charged with three golden flenrs de Ijs ; Ko. 451 b, 
n. IjXXII. CoUara appear to have been naed for differencing 
crests, when the shields were differenced with hordnres; as 
labels were habitnallj repeated on both crests and shields. 

In the ** BoKE of St. Albam's," (printed 1486, being a species 
of paraphrase of a part of an earlier treatise on Henddiy bj 
Nicholas Upton, a.d. 1440), the ancient practice of Powdering 
Shields for Difference is described nnder the title of ** OeraUgng.** 
This Grerattyng is defined to include nine figures or charges, 
each of which is said to have been used with a definite and dis- 
tinct sognification. The nine figares are crotJett (any small 
crosses), fleun de Zjfs, rotes, primroees (prebablj qnatrefoils), cinque- 
ybiZf, eaeaUope^ ehapleUj mtifleff, and creecenia. This series, accord- 
inglj, does not include martlets, billets, annulets, or reimdles of 
any tincture. Whatever may have been the original intention, 
in actual practice all traces were soon lost of any systematio 
Gerattyng for the purpose of Marking Cadency, or otherwise dif- 
ferencing allied and similar shields of arms, so that this Gerattyng 
itself gradually became identified with the development and 
ramifications of armorial bearings. The Crosslets, accordingly, 
and the other charges which once had been assumed for dif- 
ference, having become integral components of heraldic com- 
positions, ceased to be regarded as Marks of Cadency or Dif- 



200 CADENCY AND DIFFERENCING. 

ferences ; except, indeed, when a single crescent) mnllet, or other 
figure was still employed to perform the duties that once had 
devolved on the orle or the powdered field, and thus would have 
to act alone as a " Difference.*' The term " Gerattyng," which it 
does not seem to be desirable to introduce into modem blazon, 
has been very ingeniously derived (through the surprising spell- 
ing and the perpetual misprints of the " Boke of St. Alban's " 
itself), from ingerata, — a '' reading " for ingeatay the participle of 
ingeroy "to pour upon;" as the charges in geratted shields are 
poudrieSy or iemSea — poured over their fields ; (See Herald and 
Geneahgtsty II., 40.) 

15, The idea of differencing by a Single Mark of Cadency or 
Difference, was regarded with favour at an early period. The 
small charges that were oftentimes repeated in shields of arms, 
soon began to be regarded as components of the blazon : and 
they were regularly transmitted with the Ordinary or other pri- 
mary charge with which they had been associated. Hence a 
single distinct charge of small size for difference, would natu- 
rally appear not desirable merely, but absolutely necessaiy, in 
order to carry out the system of Cadency and Differencing, under 
the altered conditions of more matured Heraldry. When brou^t 
to the test of experiment, this method of differencing proved to 
be far less satisfactory than had been expected : on the one hand, 
the single small differencing charge was not found always to tell 
its own proper tale with suj£cient distinctness and emphasis, 
while, on the other hand, even this addition to a shield fre- 
quently lost its differencing attributes, and assumed a position 
as a permanent charge. It must be added, that this method of 
differencing has produced indirectly more of confusion than of 
that clear and authoritative definition, which is the aim and 
object of all true and consistent Heraldic Difference. 

The sUvm- muUet of the Dk Verbs is one of the earliest, as it 
is one of the best known and most characteristic examples of Dif- 
ferencing by a Single Charge. In the Eolls of H. III. and E. I., the 
Earl of OxFOUD — " Le Comte de Hoxenforde " — bears, qwxtierly gu. 



CADENCY AND DIFFERENCING. 201 

and or, in the first quarter a mullet org., No. 156, PL YI. ; and this 
Bhield Hugh de Yeke, the Earl's son, further differences with 
a hwdme indented sa^ No. 477, PL XXXII ; Caer. BoU, and Eolls 
of E. I., E. U., E. in. ; see also niunerons shields at Canterbury, 
the Hatfield shield, and the De Yere mullets at Earl's Golne, in 
Essex. In the Boll of B. II., AuteY de Yebe bears the muUet of 
his house ermine. In the Boll of E. II. (a. d. 1308-14) there 
occur many remarkable examples of Difference marked by a 
single small charge : and the Difference effected by this process 
in the examples contained in this Boll is made the more impres- 
sive, from the circumstance that the shields of the heads of the 
several families are generally blazoned without the Differences, 
in association with the differenced shields. The differencing 
charges employed in these shields, on investigation, would prove, 
in ahnost every case, to have been derived from some allied 
shield of arms, and consequently they at once suggest the idea of 
Marshalling. It was evidently a favourite usage with the early 
Heralds to charge these small single Differences in prominent 
positions : thus, when a lion was in the blazon of any shield, 
they evidently delighted to charge the Difference upon his 
shoulder. The examples which follow are from the Boll of E. U. : 
— Sir Giles de Brewys or Braose : arg,, crwiUey a lion rampt. or^ 
charged on its shoulder with a flewr de lys gu. Sir Estevenb de 
Segbave : «a., a lion rampt. arg., crowned or^onihe shoulder a fteur 
de lys gu.^ No. 646, PI. LXXII. Sir Nicholas de Estlee : arg.^ 
a lion ran^. gu.y on ihe shoulder a cinquefoU of the field. No. 647 ; 
Sir Giles de Estlee added to this differenced shield an azure 
label, for further Difference. Sir Bichard de Echebaston, org., a 
lion rampt. gu., on his shoulder a cinquefinl of ihe field, a label of 
three points ax. Sir Philip de Babington, in like manner, differ- 
ences with Sifleur de lys. Sir Bobebt de Walkefare, again, bears 
org., a lion rampt. sa., charged on the shoulder with a mullet or. Sir John 
DE Besoun : gu., a lion rampt. or., in the dexter chief of the shield a 
cross paJUie vair. Mounpynzon, of Norfolk, (whose name has 
since been written Mompesson), bears, arg., a lion rampt. sa., on his 



202 CADENCY AND DIFFERENCING. 

shoulder a chaffinch (« un pinzm") or. No. 648, PL LXXIT. Sir 
John de Peche : 02., an eagle disp. org., on its breast a maunche gu.. 
No. 649, PL, LXXII. Sir Edmond de Pagenham: quarterly or 
and gu,, in (he first quarter an eagle displayed vert. (Sir William 
Philip, E.G., a.d. 1440, bears, quarterly gu. and org., in the first 
quarter an eagle or, No. 650, PL LXXIL, from his Garter-Plate.) 
Sir John Mountenet : az^yona bend between six martlets or, a muUet 
gu. ; and a seoond Sir John bears the same shield similarly dif- 
ferenced, with a field gules. Sir John de Beche, org., on a bend 
gu., ihree ^ag's heads or, in the dexter chi^ a marUet sa. Sir Thomas 
de St. Leger : az., fretty org., en a chief or a muUet gu. Sir 
Edmond de Welltngtone : gu., a saUire vairee, in chief a muUet or. 
No. 661, PL LXXL 

The shield of Sir John De Beauchamp, brother of the Earl 
of Warwick, blazoned in the Calais Boll, is differenced with a 
cresceid sa.. No. 371, PL XX Y. This shield is blazoned again in 
the Boll of B. II., and with it is the Beauchamp shield with the 
martlets (No. 369, PL XXY.,) also differenced with a pierced mul- 
let sa.: a scH^ crescent differences this same shield at Worcester. 
Sir Thomas and Sir Otbs or Otho de Holland severally dif- 
ference HoUand ancient. No. 637, PL LXY., with an annulet and a 
crescent gu., (Calais Boll) : both brothers were Knights Founders 
of the Garter, and they were the second and third sons of Bobebt 
DE Holland and Maud de la Zouche. The Calais Boll also 
blazons the shield of Sir Adam Ashehubste, gu., a cross engraUed, 
and in the dexter chief a fieur de lys org. ; and that of Sir Thomas 
Bbadstone, org., on a canton gu. a rose or. ; the Boll of E. III. bla- 
zons a cinqu^oU instead of a rose on this canton. This shield of 
Bradstone is marshalled in the first quarter of an escutcheon of 
pretence in the Garter-Plate of Sir John Neville, E.G., Lord 
Montagu. In the fourth quarter this same escutcheon bears 
De la Pole, az., on a f esse between three leopard's faces or, an annulet 
gu.. No. 452 A, PL XL. ; and, in the second quarter of S^ John's 
own shield is Neville of Salisbury, gu., a saUire org., charged with 
a label of three points componee org. and az., No. 452 b. This last 



CADEXCX 



rriy-sp-rzRX-^ 



SIR T. I*ANCASTER 



DE SKGRAV£ 




SIR W PHILIP K.O 



SIR J. DE HARPEDOX. 





CADENCY AND DIFFERENCING. 



203 



shield is several times repeated upon the Beauchamp Monument 
at Warwick. Another Neville, Lord Lattmeb, charges a pdki 
upon his silver saUire^ for difference, No. 452 c, PI. XL. ; and yet 
another peer of the same £Ekmily, Neville, Lord Bebgavennt, dif- 
ferences his saltire with a rose gu. No less than eight other dif- 
ferences of the simple shield of Neville of Saby are found 
to have been assumed to distinguish the various branches of 
that powerful and far-spreading house : thus the entire group of 
these Neville differences are three latds^ the crescent^ marUeiy 
muUety fleur de lys, cinquefoil^ rose^ peUet, and two interlaced anntdets 
forming a gimmd-ring, all of them charged upon the silver sal- 
tire, as in the following shields, No. 452 d. 








No. 452 D.— Differenced ShieLds of Neville of Baby. 



204 CADENcnr and differencing. 

The EoU of E. II. gives the fifth, sixth, and seventh of these 
shields, and it blazons the muUet as sable pierced : this Eoll also 
gives for ** Le Sr. de Nevyll," gu., a sdUire org., and for *• Mens. 
Robert Nevill," org,, a wUvre gu.y—'' the reverse." Other shields 
of Neville that are altogether different, appear in the Bolls of 
H. III., E. I., E. IL, and E. HI. (See Chap. XXXI.) 

The Beauforts difference with either a MuUet or a Oreseenty in 
addition to their differenced Bordure, No. 480, PL XXXII. ; 
and the Cardinal also charges his Bordnre with a Miire instead 
of the CrescefU, (Seal). From the Roll of R. II. I select the 
following examples of differencing by a single small charge : — 
George Felbrige : or^ a lion rampt. gu,^ on hie shoulder a muUei 
arg,^ pierced. Roger Faulconbridge : arg,, a lion rampU c»., on 
his shoulder a fleur de lys or. Richard Story : arg.^ a lion rampt. 
queue faurchee purp.^ on his shoulder a cross patUe or. Wm. Bagot : 
arg.^ on a chevron gu.j between three martlets «a., a cresceiU of Ute 
field. Roger Curson : arg.^ on a bend sa. three popinjays or^ col- 
lared and legged gu. ; in the sin. chief a crescent of the last. Rauf 
Freschevill : 02., between six escaUops^ a bend arg.^ charged in chief 
with a pierced muUet gu. John de Peyton : «a., a cross eng. or, in 
the dext. chief a mvUet org. The head of the family of Heron 
bears, gu., ihree herons, two and one, org., beaked and legged or: 
this shield is differenced by Walter Heron and Gerard Heron 
by their severally adding in chief a crosdet or, and an annulet or, 
while William and John Heron add a chevron and a chevron en- 
grailed argent. Upon the Brass in Westminster Abbey to Sir 
John de Harpedon, a.d. 1451, his arms are blazoned, arg., a 
mtdlet gu., pierced of the fidd and charged with a martlet sa., for 
difference. No. 662, PL LXXII. ; in the Roll of E. II., this shield 
is borne without the martlet by Sir William de Harpedene. As 
the fifteenth century advances, examples of Cadency marked by 
a Single Small Chaise increase in number. Thus, at Childrey, 
in Berkshire, in his Brass, a.d. J 444, the arms of William Fyn- 
i&gt;i!«RNE, repeated both upon shields and upon his tabard, are, arg.. 



CADENCY AND DIFFERENCING. 205 

between three crosses pattees JkchSes, a chevron sa., charged for differ- 
ence wUh an annulet of the fidd, No. 452, PL XL. Thomas 
Langley, Bishop of Ihirham (a.d. 1406-1437), differences his 
paternal arms, paly of six arg, and vert, with a mvUet, (Official 
Seal). Sir John Stanley in 1474, at Elford, npon his monument 
^differences his quarterly shield of Stanley and Lathom with a 
crescent gules. In the Ardeme Brass at Latton, one of the 
shields bears De Bohun differenced with a single muUet on the 
bend : and Nicholas Charles gives a seal of Edward de Bohun, 
(without date, but evidently of the fourteenth century,) which 
bears a shield of Bohun charged with a single lozenge on the bend. 
Sir Thomas Lovell, K.G. (temp. Henry VII.) bears quarterly^ 1 
and 4, arg,, a chevron az,, between three squirrels seiant gu,, a 
crescent, for difference, or ; 2 and 3, vert, two chevronds arg.y each 
charged with three cinguefoHs gu. Sir Gilbert Talbot, E.G., 
(temp. Henry VII.), differences his lion crest with a crescent ; 
and, in the third quarter of his shield he marshals Neville of 
Baby, having the saltire charged with a martlet gu, Egbert Wil- 
louohby, E.G., Lord Broke (died 1502) differences his first 
grand quarter with a crescent, charged (as in the shield, No. 480, 
of the Bbauforts) upon the fesse point. And Henry Stafford 
E.G., Lord Stafford, second son of Henry, second Duke of 
Buckingham (temp. Henry VIIL), also differences his quartered 
shield upon the fesse point with a crescent; (Garter-Flate). 
And, once more, about the same period, in a monument of the 
Verneys at Eing*s Langley, the Vemey shield is differenced 
with a crescent az. At an earlier period the same Verneys dif- 
ference, after the manner then prevalent, by changing the 
tinctures of their shield and its charges, and by modifying the 
general character and arrangement of their arms. And again, 
A.D. 1597, Charles Howard, son of Willl^m, Lord Howard of 
EfBngham, differences Howard ancient with a single mullet sa. on 
the bend : an Ermine spot is also used in the same manner by 
other Howards for Difference. 



206 CADENCY AND DIFFERENCING. 

16. With the exception of Botal Cadency, which now is 
marked exclusively with the labdj the Differences of Modem 
Heraldry are the same in their general character as they may be 
considered to have been since the commencement of the fifteenth 
century. The motive or reason, which might have assigned to 
each of the differencing charges now in nse its own particular 
position in the order of their arrangement, (if any such motive 
or reason ever existed,) is no longer known ; neither is there 
any evidence to show that the present accepted order of arraqge- 
ment has been recognized earlier than the sixteenth century. 
These Modem Differences are for, 

1. The eldest son, (during his father's life-time) a Label : 
No. 379 A, PI. Xni. 

2. The second son or brother — a Crescent : No. 380. 

3. The third son— a Mtdlei : No. 381. 

4. The fourth son— a MarOel : No. 382. 

5. The fifth son— an Anmdet : No. 383. 

6. The sixth son— a Fleur de lys : No. 384. 

7. The seventh son — a Base : No. 385. 

8. The eighth son — a Cross Moline : No. 386. 

9. The ninth son^a Double Quairefoil : No. 387. 

The first son of the first son may charge his label with a 
label, his second son may charge his label with a crescent, and 
so on; and the first son of the second son may charge his 
crescent with a label, &amp;c., &amp;c., though happily this complicated 
and involved differencing is very rarely adopted. All Marks of 
Cadency are now generally borne in the chief of the shield. 
In actual practice in our own times, these differences are rarely 
used by the brothers of the same family during their father's 
life-time, but they are almost universally regarded as the here- 
ditary Marks of the junior branches of the same family, and thus in 
some families they are systematically transmitted with the Arms 
which are differenced by them. Examples may be taken from 



CADENCY AND DIFFEBENaNG. 207 

the Peerage, in the OretemU of Gbcil, Marquees of Salisburt, and 
of the Earl Stanhope; the MuUei of the Howards, Earls of 
Carlisle and Effingham; the MarUet of Brudenell, Earl of 
Cardigan, and of Murray, Lord Elibank ; the Annulet of Bertie, 
Earl of Abingdon ; the Fleur de lys of Wedderburn, Lord Lough- 
BOROUGH ; and the Bose of Neville, Earl of Abergavenny. I may 
add, the Arms of the Earl of Eldon, which are differenced with 
a Ifuflet, to show that they were first borne by the younger of 
the two illnstrions legal brothers, William and John Soott, and 
by the third son of their father. Li like manner, a MviUel upon 
the shield of the Duke of Wellington shows that the Duke was 
the third son of the Earl of Mornington. 

Daughters, the Princesses excepted since the accession of the 
present Boyal Family to the Crown of England, being all equally 
co-heiresses, do not difference their paternal arms ; but when a 
differenced Coat of Arms retains its Difference as a Charge, as 
in the instance of the Courtenays, such a coat of arms is borne 
by daughters as well as sons. In early Heraldry, however, 
ladies commonly bore their paternal Differences ; (see p. 194). 

The Bordure^ the Bend^ the CanUm, and the Chevron would 
always afford ready facilities for compounding two coats of arms, 
and, with the Labels they might also with ease be added to any 
shield '* for difference." And, Cadency and Differencing thus 
effected might as easily receive a secondary series of differences 
— small figures and devices, that is, might be charged either 
upon a label or any of its comrades, thus Differencing them from 
themselves when they were added unchai^d to any Shield of 
Arms. Upon the same principle, a Chief may sometimes have 
first been added to the shield, and then charged for difference ; 
and again always with a view to differencing. Ordinaries may 
have been coUsed ; a Chevron or a Fesse may have been resolved 
into a group of either cheoronda or bars gemeUee; and a Bend 
may have been superseded by a single hendlei or a group of 
hendleis. 



208 CADENCY AND DIFFERENCING. 

Before I enter more fully upon a consideration of Cadency 
effected by the Laibd and the Bordure^ it may be desirable to 
adduce a few additional early examples of Shields, which illus* 
trate those other modes of Differencing to which I have just 
referred. 

17. Examples of Cantons or Quarters. Cadency and Differ- 
ence marked by the Oanion may be regarded, with comparatively 
rare exceptions, as a modified form of Marshalling. The devices 
that are charged upon a Canton, with occasional exceptions only, 
are taken from and represent some allied Coat of Arms. And 
the prevailing usage is, on the one hand, that a man who does 
not quarter his maternal arms should either canton them, or 
charge some significant reference to them upon a Canton, ** for 
Difference ;" or, on the other hand, that the children and heirs 
of an Heiress, who are not also heirs of their father, should bear 
on a Canton their &amp;ther*s arms. It will be borne in mind that 
in the earliest Bolls of Arms a Canton is entitled a '* Quarter.'* 

A Canton or Quarter Erminey apparently derived from the ermine 
shield of John Count of Brittany Earl of Eighmond, appears 
differencing the Arms of several early families. The Shield of 
John de Dreux himself, Count of Brittany, (No. 116, PI. V., and 
p. 34,) is a most expressive example of the use of the Canton. 
The mother of the Count was a sister of Edward I. ; he there- 
fore placed about his shield a Bordure of England; and, as Earl 
of BiCHMOND, he added the Canton ermine. Bobert de Tateshall 
bears, ehequie org. and gu,, a quarter erm. : E. de Boys, arg.^ two 
hoars gu., a quarter erm. : Boll of H. III. Thomas de Hewes, arg.^ 
a freiie gu., a quarter erm. : Philip le Despencer, harry ofeixor 
and az.y a quarter erm. : Bafe Bassett, arg.^ ihree piles gu.^ a quarter 
erm. : Boll of E. Ill, In the Calais Boll Sir Symon de Bassett 
bears, or^ three piles in point gu.^ a canton erm.y which shield is 
repeated in the Garter-Plate of Balph, Lord Bassett, of Drayton, 
who died in 1390, No. 456, PI. XL. In the Calais Boll, B. de 
Bassett bears, or, three pallets gu., a canton erm., No. 455, PI. XL. : 






CADENCY. 



DE 


BIW 


)T. 




&amp; 




&amp; 


H 




" 


•&gt;3?\ 


9 





D' ACRES. 


&lt;^ &lt;^ ^. 



DE HE.MENHALE 

7^ 



=ii_ 



&amp;" 




'.dte IX XI 



CABENCT AND DIFFEBSNCING. 209 

(see also Nos. 402, 403, PL XXXYIL); By comparing these 
two shields, it will be seen that the Bassetts, while retaining 
the same ermine emUon^ differenced three paUets with as many 
jpiZes, both the tincture, and the number, and also the general 
character of the changes being the same in the two shields ; and 
a further comparison with Nos. 402 and 403, will show the 
ermine field which is represented in the Canton, and the tinctuxes 
cr and gvles. In the Boll of B. IL, again. Sir John Bassett 
bears, with the three piles in point, a canton org., charged with a 
griffin eegreant m., armed gu.. No. 654, PL LXXL " Le Sr. la 
ZowcHE ** (Boll B. IL) bears, go. bezantee^ a canton erm.^ No. 366 a, 
PI. LXVII, (see p. 1 74.) The Staffobds also, with some other 
fiunilies of less note, difference with the same canton ermine. 
From the Boll of B. IL I obtain one other excellent example, the 
shield of Sir William lb Bbtan, or, three pilea from the chief az., 
a eanUm palff of four arg. and of the aeeondy charged with a bend gu., 
thereon three eaglets diap. gold, — this shield accordingly is Brtan 
differenced with a canton o/Okakdison. (See p. 211.) 

WiLLLAM DE Dtjnstanville bcars, or^., frettie gu., a canton of 
England — that is, a canton or quarter gu,, charged with a lion pose, 
guard, or : and Wiluam de Lancaster bears the same canton on 
a shield org., charged with two hare gu.. No. 453, PL XL. ; Boll 
H. in. : this same shield is blazoned for John de Lancaster in 
the Gaer. Boll. Again, Sir Thomas Ktriell, K.O. (a.d. 1460), 
bearS) or, two chevrons gu., a canton of England ; in this instance 
the Boyal Canton was certainly a " Difference by augmentation," 
obtained in acknowledgment for good serrice done to the House 
of Lancaster: about a century earlier, John Ktriel bears, or, 
three chevronels and a quarter gu. In the Calais Boll, Sir WUiLiAM 
DE Warren bears, chequie or and az., on a canton gu. a Honed rampt. 
arg. that is, he bears a canton of Fitz-Alan, No. 653, PI. LXXI. 
In the Boll of B. IL, Bighard de Kyreeby bears, arg., two hare 
gu., on a canton of the laet a cross moline or. : De Etton, harry of 
twelve arg. and gu., a UM of three points az., over aU a canton sa. 

p 



210 CADENCY AI^D DlFFERENCINa. 

charged uM a croaa paUmce or : and Avert Bbitchebubt bears, 
arg.^ two bars az.y on a canton of the last a marUet or. The arms of 
the WmviLLES or Woodvilles are org. a fesae and a canton gu. 
These arms it is customary to blazon with a fesse and canton 
conjoined ; but the canton certainly ought to be represented as 
raised in relief above the fesse, for a bordure is charged upon a 
fesse, and a canton is charged upon a bordure. The Harfords 
record the alliance of an Heiress of Utab Scropes with their house, 
by adding the arms of Sgrope, so famous in their severe sim- 
plicity, to their paternal shield. A good example occurs in the 
Brass to Anthony Harford, a.d. 1590, at Col wall in Hereford- 
shire: this shield is thus blazoned, so., two bends arg.^ with a 
canton ofScropey that is, a canton az.y charged wUha hend or. 

With examples of Cantons I may here notice the remarkable 
Difference blazoned in the Boll of H. III. for Hugh de Balliol, 
No. 645, PL LXVn. The shield of " John de Baluoli/' is 
given as, gu,j an ode {^^faux escochon^^ org.; and for Hugh, his 
son, the same shield, charged in the dexter chief with a small 
shield bearing, az., a lion ran^. org. crowned or : I may add, for 
Eustace de Baluol, the shield differenced again, ^ d^azur aufaus 
eioocheon d'or cruaide dCor.'^ The Peerage gives characteristic 
examples of shields charged with small shields which are them- 
selves chaiged, in the arms of the Cecils, Marquesses of Salis- 
bury and Exeter, who bear, harry often org. and az,, over aU m» 
e8Cutcheon8j three^ two, and onCy m., each charged wUh a lion ram^. of 
thefirst. 

18. Examples of Bends and Bendlets. The simple Bend as 
borne on the shield of Scrope, would readily suggest the fitness 
of this Ordinary and its Diminutive for Differencing ; and accord- 
ingly in many instances Bends and Bendleis are found to have 
been charged upon early shields for marking Difference. Boll 
of H. III. : WiLUAM DE Gant, harry of six org. and az.j a hend gu. : 
E. DE Kendall, org., a hend az.y cotised vert ; in another Boll of 
the same period this shield is blazoned, arg.^ a hend cotised in- 



C KT&gt; Y. N r Y . 




late X 



CADENCY AND DIFFERENONO. 211 

denied vert ; and in the KoU of E. 11., carg,^ a hend vert, coUsed 
indented gu. In &amp; BiaflS at Long Melford, the same* blazonry 
appears, but differently tinctured^ for a Clopton, «a., a hend emt., 
coUged indented or. KoU of Caer. : John de Grey, harry of mx, 
org. and az.y a hendlet engrailed gu, ; (Compare No. 121, p. 35; 
this shield of De Orey with the barry field, bnt without the 
bendlet, is also blazoned in the Caer. HoU.) ; Bobert le Fitz- 
Payne, gu,, three liana pass, in pale org., over aU a hendlet az. : Wil- 
liam de Grandison, paly of six arg. and az., on a hend gu. three 
eaglets displayed or. The shield of the Grandisons in its original 
simplicity is, paly of six, arg. and az. Upon this a hend gules is 
charged. Next, upon the bend itself ihree golden eaglets appear ; 
No. 459, PL XLIX; (this shield is blazoned in the Boll of 
E. n., and in the Calais Boll). These eaglets are then differ- 
enced by the substitution, first, of (hree escallops, and subsequently 
of three huMes^ all or; and finally, John de Grandison, Bishop 
of Exeter, a.d. 1327-1369, completes the group with his shield, 
having the red bend charged with a silver mitre hetween two golden 
huckles; No. 460, PI. XLIX. I must add that, in Harl. MS. 
5827, the shield of Bishop John de Grandison, is blazoned paly 
of six arg, and az., on a hend gu,, a mitre hetween two eaglets or ; 
No. 460 a, PL LXXm. In the Caer. Boll, John Fitz-Mar- 
MADUKE bears, gu,, a f esse hetween three popinjays arg,; but in the 
Boll of Henry m., Bobert Fitz-Marhaduke adds to the same 
arms an azure hendlet, as in No. 458, PL XL. ; which example, 
having the bendlet added, is drawn from the shield of an 
effigy of the time of Edward I., probably the effigy of the 
Caerlaverock Fitz-Marmaduke himself, at Chester-le-Street, 
Durham. 

Boll of E. n. : Sir Henry de Segrave, sa, a lion rampt, arg,, 
crowned or, over aU a hendlet gu, ; Sir Symon bears the bendlet or, 
No. 655, PL LXYII. ; and Sir Stephen engrails (he red hendlet. 
Sir HoGH Wake, Sir Philip Courtenay, and Sir John Gasceline, 
all difference their paternal arms with a bendlet : — thus, Wake, 

p 2 



212 CADENCY AND DIFFERENCING. 

or^ two bars gu., in chief three UnieauXj and over dU a bendlet az^ ; 
CoDBTENAY, OT^ three torteaux^ over aU a hendlet az. ; Gasceune, or, 
biUettSe az., a bendlet gu. ; Sir Simon Lyndbbhaye, or, an eagle dis- 
played purp,, ddmUged by a bendlet componSe arg. and gu. ; Thomas 
DE Oabshale, quarterly arg. and aa,, ona bend gu. three fleura de lys 
or. Galfds Boll : Sir Nicholas Poynings, bairry of »x or and vert^ 
over aU a bend gu. ; Sii* Hugh le Despencer chaxges Ids aable bend 
wilh three mullets org.; and Sir Philip engrails the bend itself; 
Sir Nicholas Langforde, paly of six or and gu., and over aSL a 
bend arg. ; Sir Allan Clayering, quarterly or and gu., on a bend sa. 
threfi muUets arg. Boll of B. IT. : Thomas de Walshe, gu., two 
bars gemdles arg., surmounted by a bendlet of the same ; John lb 
Strange, gu., two lions pass, in pale arg., a bendlet or, the same 
arms without the bendlet being given for another John lb 
Strange ; and Bobert db Stafford, or, a chevron gu., surmounted 
by a bendlet az. I add another example from the sculptured 
effigy of a cross-legged knight at Whatton in Nottinghamshire, 
whose mutilated shield still shows that it originally bore on a 
bend, between six crosdets, three roundles. No. 656 ; one more, from 
the bold effigy of a knight of the period of Edward II., from 
Glehongre in Herefordshire, whose shield bears, sculptured with 
extraordinary spirit, barry of six, on a bend three lion'a faces. 
No. 657 ; and one from a Brass of the same period at Gorleston 
in Suffolk, in which the knight, a De Bacon, whose ailettes 
are charged with a plain cross, displays on his shield a bend in- 
denied (or dancettSe, or perhaps five lozenges conjoined in bend), and 
an a chief two mullets of six points pierced ; No. 658, Fl. LXXIII. 

19. Examples of Chiefs. The shield of the De Geneyilles, 
No. 131 A, PL XIV., already blazoned (sa., three bamades in pale 
or, and on a chief erm. a demi-Uon rampt. issuani gu.), is an ad- 
mirable example ; (Boll H. lU). In this same Boll, Bobert le 
Brus bears, org., a saltire and a chief gu. ; Fitz Baldolp bears, 
arg., the chief of the shield frettSe, gu. ; and A. de St. Amand, arg., 
fretty, a chitf sa. This last shield in the Caer. Boll is differenoed 



CADENCY 



ChAVT^-R XV. 



UE 8 AC OX. 



D'AITBYGKE. 



v^ To/ 





Plate i.yxri 



CADENCY AND DIFFERENCINQ. 213 

for AuMEBY DE St. Amand, by liaving three hezanis charged upon 
the chief. Db Tateshall, ehequSe or and gu.y a chief erm. ; Db 




Na 656.— Fragment of a Shield at Wbatton, NoithamptoDahire ; (p. 212.) 

Graham, gu.^ a saUire arg.^ on a chief or three escallops of the first ; 
No. 409, PL XXVin., Caer. Eoll. John de Clinton, org., on a 
chief az. three fleurs de lys cr^ Eoll E. 11. Sir John Strevelyn 
arg.y on a chief gu. three buckles, their tongues in fesse, or ; Sir Amy as 
Brett gu,, in chief a lion of England; Sir Galyon Corder arg,, on 
a chief dancdtSe three crosslets or, Calais Boll. Wiluam de Ermine, 
erm. J a saUire eng. gu,y on a chief of the last a lion of England ; John 
Deverosb, arg.y on a fesse gu, a muUet or, in chief ihree torteaux, 
RollE.n. 

20. Examples of Chevrons and Bars Gemelles. Boll of 
H. m. : De Mbynell, &lt;u., three bars gemeUes and a chief or ; De 
MoNEMUE, or, three chevronels gu., and over aU a fesse az. ; De 
Richmond, gu., two bars gemelles and a chief or ; De Treoos, gu,, 
three bars gemelles and in chirf a lion pass. or. Caer. Boll : Babtho^ 
LOMEW DE Badlesmere, arg., a fesse between two bars gemeUes gu.^ 
over aU a label of three points az. ; No. 659, PI. LXXIIL De Paghe, 
arg.y a fesse between two chevrons gu. This aggronpment often 
occurs with several variations in the tinctures. The famous 
Robert de Fitz Walter, a member of the family of the De 
Clares, bears, or, a fesse between tfoo chevrons gu. Upon the shield 
and surooat of a knightly effigy of a De L'Isle, (temp. Edw. I.), 



214 CADENCY AND DIFFERENCING. 

at Rampton in Cambridgeshire, the fesse and the two chevrons 
are soible upon or ; this same shield is blassoned in the Calais Boll, 
which also gives, for Sir William Ktdesbte, «., a /esse or^ 
' between two chevrons org. The St. Quintinb, on a field of gcid^ 
bear either a single chevron, or two cheorona, or three chevronela of 
the same tincture, always retaining the same chief txUrSe ; 
Nos. 461 and 462, PL XXVII.; these shields are drawn from 
the Brasses to the St. Quintins at Brandsburton and Harpham in 
Yorkshire. Henry Frrz HaoH bears, cw., three ehevroneh interlaced, 
and a chief or ; John Boteler, az., a chevron between three covered 
eup8 or; and Piers de Carew, org., ihree bars gemdles aa. ; Boll 

B.n. 

21. The Bordure would enable the early Herald to mark 
Cadency with the utmost distinctness, and yet without infringe 
ing in the slightest degree upon the original composition of the 
shield to be differenced ; and also, at the same time, in anticipa- 
tion of marshalling arms, it affords ready facilities for incor- 
porating the distinctive insignia of two different shields into a 
single composition. The Bordure of France of John Plantagenet 
of Eliham, (Nor 332. PL XIX.), is a fine example of both 
Cadency and Marshalling. The Bordure bezanlSe of the Earl 
of Cornwall, the first of the eight bordered shields that are 
blazoned in the Boll of H. HL (No. 194, PL V.), and the Bor- 
dure of England that surrounds the banner of John de Dreux of 
Brittany, in the Caerlaverock Boll (No. 116, PL V.), are equally 
characteristic examples of Marshalling and Cadency effected by 
the same process. The differenced shields of the Plantaoenets, 
Beauforts, Hollands, and Tudors, with their Bordures are 
described in full in the next Chapter : here, I now proceed to 
adduce some examples of shields differenced by Bordurea and 
Labels, in addition to those that have been already noticed. 

Examples of Bordures. Boll of Henry III. : — ^Frrz Geoffrey 
quarterly or and gu., a bordure vcUrSe ; De Montgomery, erm., a 
bordure gu,, semee of horse-shoes or : De Aubeny, or, two chevrons 



C A D E jsr c ^ 



CnAPIrlR &gt;:-/I. 




r.it.; ,,; 



CADENCY AND DIFFERENCING. 215 

gu.f teithtn a hordure of the ha : De Umpheaville, or^ a cinquefoU 
gtLy wUhin a hordure az, senUe of horae-shoea or. Caer. Boll : — John 
DE Babb, 02., cruaUff JUchy or^ two harbda haurient addorsed goldj 
wiiMn a hordure engraUed gu., No. 329 A, PL XIX. : HaoH de Yere, 
son of the Earl of Oxford, De Vere^ unthin a hordure indented ao. 
(this shield occurs in several Bolls), No. 477, PI. XXXH. : The 
£arl of Lothian, gu.^ a lion rampt. arg.^ within a hordure of the 
firet^ semee ofroaee ofihe second^ No. 429 a, PI. LXXL Bertram 
De Montbourchier, arg.^ (kree pitchers gu,^ vfithin a hordure m. 
hezaniee, (also BoU of E. IL and Seal), No. 464, PI. LL Boll 
of E. I.: — ^BoGER L'Estranoe, gu.^ two lions pose, in pale org,, 
within a hordure eng. or^ No. 660, PI. LXTT. Simon de Ltbourn, 
az.y MSB lionceU rampt, arg.^ within a hordure eng. or. Another Boll 
of E. L : — De Ferrers, vairie^ a hovdure aa. semSe of horaeshoea 
org. : thi^ shield of De Ferrers is more commonly blazoned, 
vairSe or and gu., a hordure az, aemSe of horae-ahoea or^ No. 463, 
PI. LI. Boll of E. n. : John de Hastinos, or, a maunche ^., 
within a hordure of Voience^ ('* de or, a une maunche de goulea od la 
hordure de Valence") No. 661, PI. LXII. ; this is a remarkable 
example of the nse of the bordnre for marshalling, as a prelude 
to qnartering. William de Beauchamp, Beauchamp wOh martleta, 
within a hordure indented org. : Thomas de Pickering, arg.^ a lion 
rampL aa., within a hordure gu. hezaniSe ; John de Wiotone, aa., 
three muUeta and a hordure indented or ; John de Welle, gu., aix 
creacenta org., within a hordure componh or and az. : Nicholas de 
BiviRE, vairSe org. and gu., a hordure az. hezantSe : Bauf de Boch- 
FORD, quarterly or and gu., a hordure aa. hexantie, which shield John 
DE BocHEFORD differences by bearing his hordure indented ; Bich ard 
de Basseti, paly of aix or and gu., a hordure az. hezantSe; John de 
Westone, arg., a feaae aa., a hordure gu. hezantSe; and for Johan 
DE Weston, *' sun filz," the same shield having the hordure in- 
dented. Calais Boll : — Sir Andrew de Montaulte, of Messenden, 
az., a Uon rampt. org,, a hordure or ; Sir Boger Neville, gu., a 
feaae dancetie org., a hordure or. Garter-Plates : — Gilbert Lord 



216 CADENCY AND DIFFERENCING. 

Talbot, K.G., brother of the Earl of Shrewsbury, gu., a Uon 
ram^., wUMn a hordure engraUed or. No. 662, PL LXII. ; John 
Qrey, E.6., Earl of Tankeryili^, gu., a Uon rampt., wUhin a bor- 
dure engrailed org. ; Sir John db Cornwall, E.G., Lord Fanhope, 
erm,, within a hordure «a. heascmtSe, a Uon rampt. croumed or, and 
charged for Difference wUh a mnUet org. No. 488, Fl. LL Boll of 
B. U. : John Montagu, org., (kree fiteih in feese gu., a hordure so. ; 
John Bocheford, quarterly or and gu.^ a hordure «a. charged wiA 
deven bezants; Bauff Bocheford, quarterly or and gu,, in the einider 
chief an annulet org,, a hordure ea. charged with ten hezawte ; Nichol 
Byllynqe, gu., three fish naiant in pale or, a hordure eng. org, ; 
Edm. FiTZ Hugh, gu., (hree lions rampt., two and one, or, a hordure 
eng. org., ; Bauff Cheyne, gu., four fusils in f esse org,, each charged 
wi&amp; an escallop sa., a hordure of the second. A remarkable Bordure 
was borne by Henry Courtenay and by his son Edward, the last 
two Earls of Devon of their race. This Henry was the son of 
WnxuM Courtenay, (died 1602,) and his wife Catherine Plan- 
tagenet, youngest daughter of Edward IV.; his arms are, 
quarterly, 1, (he marks his mother's royal rank by placing the 
heraldic insignia which represent her in the first quarter,) 
France Modem and England quarterly, differenced uM a hordure 
quarterly of England and France; 2 and 3, Courtenay; 4. Bivers, 
or, a lion rampt. az., armed gu. ; No. 663, PI. LXII. 

When the Constable and Marshal of England pronoimced 
sentence (aj&gt;. 1390) in the fiunons controversy between Bichard, 
Lord ScROPE of Bolton, and Sir Bobert Qrosvenor of Cheshire, 
in &amp;Yonr of the claim of Lord Sgrope to bear the disputed Arms, 
as., a hend or, the sentence went on to authorize Sir Bobert 
Orosvenor to bear the same arms within a hordure argent,— -ibis 
concession being made in consideration of the good presumptive 
evidence that had been adduced in support of his claim : but the 
King finally decided, on an appeal to him, that the arms were 
exclusively those of Scrope, and that they could not be borne 
simply differenced with a bordure by Qrosvenor, considering 



CADE:XCr _ BORDVRES. 



chapte:^ jx 



X'ESTRANGT-: 




1)E HASTiycVS 



CORNWJkLL . 








-.1 
-.1 



CADENCY Ain&gt; DI7FERENGINQ. 217 

tilt "a bordune is not a Bufficient difference between two 
strangen in the same kingdom, but only between oonsin and 
arasin related by blood." Thns did Bichard II. rule that the 
Bordnre is a Hark of Cadency properly so called. 

In the Heraldiy of Scotland, Bcrdwres appear differencing their 

patenial shields on the Seals of Sir Andrew Murray, (a.d. 1292), 

HiTGH Fbaser (1^77), and Patrick Hepburn (1371) : the first of 

these Bordnies is charged with deoen roses, the second with nine 

»»iSett, and the third is simply engraOed : (Seton's ScoUish H^ 

ra^, p. 196). Maule, Eai^of Fanmure; per pale org. and gu., 

on a hordure dko per pale eigHf eseaUopB, all eomUereharged. Again, 

'' when Hamilton of Innerwlck, the earliest Cadet of the House 

of Hamilton, married the daughter and heiress of Stewart of 

Cmxton, he placed a /ess ckecquy between his three paternal 

cinqnefoilB, which figures were afterwards surrounded by a 

hordnare duarged w£k eight bueklee for De Glay of Iimerwick, in 

consequence of another alliance ;" {ScoUish Heraldry, p. 110.) 

The Bordure was frequently used by Prelates for differencing 
their arms. Thus, Qloyhr gives the following amongst other 
examples: — ^William Courtenay, Archbishop of Canterbury, 
A.D. 1381-1396, or, three iorteaiuxj on a Idbd of three points az. as 
many ndtres arg,j No. 664, PI. LXXIII. ; and these arms the 
Archbishop bears impaled by those of the See of Canterbury. 
Thomas Fiiz-Alan or Arundel, Archbishop Cantuar., a.d. 1396- 
1414, (son of BoBERT Fitz-Alan, thirteenth Earl of Arundel), 
Fitz-Alan and Warrenne quarterly , within a bordure engraUed arg, 
John Stafford, Archbishop Cantuar., a.d. 1443-1462, or, on a 
ehemron gu, a mitre org., the whole loUMn a hordure sa. Walter de 
Stapledon, Bishop of Exeter, a.d. 1806-1829, arg., two hendlets 
ndmUe so., within a hordure of (he second charged with eight keys, or, 
No. 665, PI. LXXIII. ; Bishop Stapledon's bordure is sometimes 
blazoned gvles and sometimes azure, as at Exeter College, Oxford. 
Edmund de Stafford, Bishop Exeter, a.d. 1394-1419, or, a chevron 
gu., wUMn a hofdure cf ike second, charged wUh eight mitres org.. 



218 CADENcnr and differencing. 

(sometimes the mities are cr), Henry Le Despenceb, Bishop 
Norwich, a.d. 1370-1406, Le Despencer (No. 107), within a hordure 
az.f charged ioUh fifteen miires or^ No. 465, PI. LI. : this shield ijs 
thus blazoned on a boss in roof of the south aisle of the Church 
of Great Yarmouth; and it also appears with several archiepis- 
copal shields of the Metropolitan See, in the remarkable series 
of heraldic bosses at Ganterbuiy. In his official seal. Bishop 
Henrt Le Despencer has the shield of the see of Norwich on the 
dexter side of his effigy, and on the sinister side his differenced 
shield of Le Despencer. The personal seal of this Bishop is a 
most interesting example of heraldic composition. From a 
helm and mantling surmounted by a mitre and the Le Despencer 
crest — a griffin's head, the shield of the prelate, hangs by its • 
sinister angle : it is charged with the Le Despencer arms within 
a bordure, upon which are eight miires. On either side of the 
helm is a shield : the one to the dexter bears the arms of the 
See of Norwich — a«., three mitres or : while the sinister shield is 
charged with seven mascles. The bordure in this seal having 
the number of the mitres reduced from fifteen to eight, exem- 
plifies the heraldic feeling of the time which held the number 
of the repetitions of the differencing charges of any shield to be 
a matter of indifference; No. 666, PI. LXXm. At St. Alban's 
in the north aisle, there remains in the stained glass a shield 
of Abbot John db Wheathampstede, a.d. 1421-1460, which may 
be said to bear the arms of the Abbey within a bordure of the 
Abbot, — az,j a saUire cTj within a bordure gu., charged wOh eighi 
garbs of the second ; No. 466, PL LI. : see also No. 201 a, PI. XY. 
I may here notice, as a singular illustration of the prevalence 
of what may be styled the heraldic sentiment of the thirteenth 
and fourteenth centuries, that the Bishops of that day sometimes 
blazoned their paternal arms upon their official vestments. Thus, 
upon the seal of Anthony Bbc, the celebrated Bishop of Durham, 
A.D. 1283-1310, the effigy of the Prelate is vested in a chesuble 
charged with his cross recercdee ; and Lewis de Beaumont, Bishop 



CADENCY AND DIFFERENCING. 219 

of the same See (a.d. 1317-1333), appears upon hia Seal having 
his chesnble aemee d&amp;-ly8 and charged with a lion rampt, (See 
PI. XXVin., No. 427). This episcopal effigy stands between 
two shields, that to the dexter bearing England, while the other 
would seem to be a modification of the arms of Jerusalem (No. 1, 
p. 8) ; it is charged with a cross potent^ between four groups of rnnoZZ 
crosses pattSeSy three crosses in each group.* 

22. Cadency marked by the Label. The earliest known Label 
appears upon the counter-seal of Saer de Quincet, first Earl of 
Winchester, one of the Magna Charta Barons, who died in 1219 : 
his arms are, or, a fesse gu., in chief a label of many points — their 
exact number, which probably is twelve, it is not easy to deter- 
.mine ; nor can it be certainly demonstrated that this label was 
borne as a Mark of Cadency, and yet Saer was certainly the 
younger brother of Egbert de Quincey. 

Li 1235, John de LAa, Earl of Lincoln, displays upon his 
counter-seal a label of four points, over a bendlet. No. 33 b, p. 25. 
In Westminster Abbey, one of the shields emblazoned by the 
Heralds of either Henry m. or Edwabd I., bears the same arms 
of the Earl of Lincoln ; the shield is quarterly or and gu. ; but the 
black bendlet, which is veiy narrow, is a hendlet sinister, and the 
label is set very high in the shield, and there is also a narrow 
border, raised and tinctured sable. No. 467, Fl. XLIX. During 
the lifetime of his father, Edward L charged his shield upon 
his seal with a label, as the recognized heraldic Diflference which 
should distinguish his own shield as the Prince Botal of Eng- 
land, from the shield of the King his &amp;ther. Prince Edward's 
label is so placed as to form the actual chief of the escutcheon, and 
two of its five points lie alternately over and under the tail of 
the uppermost lion. No. 470, p. 173. Edward U., while Prince 
BoYAL, bore the label set lower on the shield and with longer 

* Even now, ecclesiastics of tho Roman Chnrch sometimes blazon their anns 
upon their yestments^ as appears from a photograph portrait of the present 
Pope, Pius IX., in which the stole is charged with the paternal arms of the 
Pontiff. 



220 CADENCY AND DIFFEBENCINQ. 

points, No. 430, PL XLV. This label of Prince Edward is 
blazoned azure in the Boll of Caerlaverock, and in the Boll of 
H. UL, his father's label has the same tincture. It will be 
borne in remembrance that labels, when they were first intro- 
duced, were borne as well by younger brothers as by sons in 
their father's lifetime ; and also that at an early period in the 
history of heraldry labels became hereditary, as in the instance 

of the COUBTENATS. 

The early labels were always blazoned in a conspicuons 
manner ; and, when they had not their tincture determined by 
any special circumstances, they were tinctured in such colours 
as might contrast most efifectively with the blazoniy of the 
shields upon which they were charged. These early labels are 
found always to extend across the entire field of the shield from 
dexter to sinister ; they have the ribbon itseK very narrow, and 
it is generally set in close proximity to the uppermost margin 
of the shield, as in the examples upon the monuments of Edward 
m. and Edmond of Langley. The points, which are broader 
(sometimes considerably broader) than the horizontal ribbon, are 
in almost all cases either five or three in number ; but a few 
examples of early labels having four points have been observed. 
The secretum of John de Laci, Earl of Lincoln, a.d. 1232-1258, 
has the hbd of four points^ No. 33 b, p. 25. In like manner, 
upon his magnificent monument in Westminster Abbey, Edmond 
Cbouchback, first Earl of Lancaster, displays a Icibd of four points : 
this Earl, however, and his eldest son also, in their seals bear 
labels of both five and three points. (See Labd^ in Chap. Vll., 
and also in Chap. XXXII.) 

An early seal of one of the Nevilles, No. 667, Chap. XXXI., has 
the label of four points charged upon the chief of the shield: but 
another Bobert de Neville, about a.d. 1270, bears his label of 
fiffepointSj as in No. 668. It does not appear that any peculiar 
significancy is attached to the number of these *' points ;** at any 
rate, labels of five and of three points were certainly borne by 



CADENCY AND DIFFERENCING. 221 

the same individual at the same time, and they are even charged 
upon the obverse and the reverse of the same seal. The seal and 
the counter-seal of Edward II., as Prince Hotal, for example, 
have severally labds of three and five points : and Henrt Plan- 
TAOENET of BoUngbroke displays, on his impaled shield, a label of 
fivepoirUa and a label of three points side by side^ No. 347, p. 165. 

The Chaises with which labels are constantly differenced are 
always intended to convey some significant meaning of their 
own, and thus they take an important part in giving an historical 
character to heraldic compositions. These chaises, necessarily 
drawn to a very small scale, are placed upon the points of any 
label ; sometimes a single charge appears upon one point only, 
at other times it appears upon each point, but more frequently 
the charge is repeated so that the same device is generally repre- 
sented three times upon each point. This arrangement^ however, 
is left entirely to the discretion of the artist, there being no 
heraldic signification implied in the repetition of the charges ; 
when they are repeated, the object is to establish more decidedly 
the character of these small differencing charges, and to render 
their presence more conspicuous. The small figures are almost 
invariably ail drawn to the same scale, and placed one above 
another ; but, at St. Alban*s there is a shield in stained glass of 
France Ancient and England quarterly, differenced with a labd of 
three points having on each point three ermine spots, which are ar- 
ranged two and one, each of the single spots, being much larger 
than the pair of spots above them ; No. 468, PI. XXXI. In this 
example, and in several others also, I have not considered it to 
be necessary to engrave more than the label with its charges, 
the shields always being repetitions of either England, France 
Ancient and England, or France Modem and England. 

Labels charged with three ermine spots, three fleurs de lys, &lt;&amp;c., 
placed in pale on each of the points, are of common occurrence ; 
and this, indeed , is always implied, unless some other arrange- 
ment should be expressly specified. Two of the Plantagenet 



222 CADENCY AND DIFFERENCING. 

Shields at Great Yarmouth have ttoo ermine spots only on each 
point of their labels, and a third shield has two torteaux only on 
each point, Nos. 469 and 472, PI. XXXI. : and, in like manner, 
one of the shields on the Burghersh monument has its label 
charged on each point with two fleurs de Zya, and another with 
two ermine spots, while a third has a single red cross upon each point ; 
PI. XXXIV. Upon the Stall-Plate of George Plantagenet, 
E.G., brother of Edward IV., his label is blazoned with a single 
canton upon each of its three points : and this same label is re- 
peated in the stained glass at St. Alban's, No. 473, PI. XXXI.: 
and again, Richard Plantagenet, second son of Edward IV., 
upon his Stall-Plate charges a single red canton upon the first point 
only of his silver label, No. 474. I may add here, that during his 
father's lifetime, Eichard II. differences his shield with a sHoer 
label of either five or three points, charged on the ceniral point ordy 
with a Cross of St, Oeorge, No. 486. Occasionally two distinct 
groups of differencing charges appear upon the same label ; in 
this case the label has five points, and it either divides its cen- 
tral point per pale, or allots two points to one group of charges 
and three to the other; thus, on the monument at King's 
Langley, the shield that stands last of the series on the south 
side bears, France Ancient and England quarterly, with a label of 
five points per pale of Brittany and of France; points 1 and 2, 
ermine (three spots on each) ; and points 8, 4, 5, of France (three 
fleurs de lys on each), No. 486. The Stall-Plate of John Plan- 
tagenet, son of Henrt IV., is differenced with a similar label, 
charged upon France Modem and England quarterly. Leaving the 
differenced Arms of the Plantagenet Princes for more full consi- 
deration in the following Chapter, I now proceed to notice some 
examples of labels borne upon shields that are not of Boyal 
rank. 

In one Boll of Henry III., thirteen shields are differenced 
with labels of five points ; of these labels six are azare, five are 
gules, and there is one of each of the metals. A second Eoll of 



CADEl^CY^ LABELS 

C:rIAFTZR XV 




?].-^-teLXjC"!^' 



CADENCT AND DIFFERENCINO. -223 

the same period has fifteen labels of five points; one ar^ one 
argent, seven aaure, five gules and one sable. There are five 
banners or shields differenced with cuure labels of five points in 
the Caerlaverock Boll; one with a similar label vert, and one 
sable; one azure, and one gtdes of three points; and a third of 
three points, of France, The Calais Boll, which blazons one 
hundred and eighteen shields, has twelve labels ; two only are 
of five points, and of these one is argent, and the other of France ; 
two, of three points, are or, one is argent, four are azure, one is 
gtdes, a fifth azure label is charged with nine silver crescents, and 
a second golden label bears on each point an eaglet vert. In about 
the same proportion to the numbers of the shields blazoned in 
other Bolls, are the numbers and also the varieties of the labels 
that appear in them to mark cadency. 

Examples of Labels. Boll of H. m. : De Laci, Earl of Likooln, 
quarterly or and gu., a bend sa., over all a label of five points vert 
(compare No. 33 b, p. 25) ; Eustace de Toubs, gu., an orle and a 
label of five points or; Wiluam de Clare, or, three chevronds gu., a 
label of five points az, ; J. le Strange, gu., two lions pass, in pale org., 
a label of five points az. ; E. de Lonoesp^e, az., six lumcels rampt., 
three, two and one, or, a label of five points gu. Boll of E. I. : Sir 
John Louell or Lovel, harry nebuUe of six or and gu., on a labd of 
five points az., fifteen mullets org. No. 502, PI. XXXIII. (Compare 
No. 670, PL LXXIV.) Boll of Caer.: John de Segrave (eldest 
son), sa., a lion ramp, org., crowned or, and a label of five points gu. ; 
John de St. John (the heir), his father's arms, arg., on a chief gu, 
two mullets pierced or, with a label of five points az.. No. 404, PI. 
XXVIIL ; John Chavering, son and heir of Bobert Fitz Boger, 
quarterly or and gu., a bend sa., over aU a label of five points vert ; Ed- 
MOND DE Hastings, brother of the Earl, or, a maunche gu., and a 
labd of five points sa. ; Maurice de Berkeley had, upon his fiither's 
banner, " a labd of azure because his father was living ;" See No. 392, 
PL XXXVII. ; and Patrick of Dunbar, son of the Earl of Lothian, 
a labd of five points az., charged upon a banner otherwise identical 



224. CADENCY AND DIFFERENCING. 

witJi that of his father. See No. 429, PI. XXXH., and No. 429 a, 
PI. LXXI., and p. 193. Eoll of E. 11. : Sir John Daubeny, ^, 
a fesse indented (or five fusils conjoined in /esse) erm^ in chief three 
mvUHets cr^ over aU a label of three points as. Sir Hugh Audele, gu.j 
frettSe or, a label az. ; Sir James Audele, gu., frettee or, a labd (f 
Longesp^ (on each point of the amre label alioncd or)— his mother 
was a daughter of William de Longesp^e, No. 669, PL LXXIV. 
Sir Willdlm Loyel, undSe or and gu., a labd of Valence (the points 
barrvUe org. and as,, and on each a martkt gu.); No. 670, PL 
LXXIV. Sir EiCHARD de la Yacha, gu., three lioncds arg., a label 
of Warrenne, {chequie or and az.); No. 671, PL LXXIV. Sir 
John Tendringe, az., a fesse between two chevrons or, a labd gu,, 
fleurettee org.. No. 672, PL LXXIV. ; Sir William de Suleye, or, 
two bends gu., a loibd barrtdie org. and ax. ; Sir Egbert Peche, org, 
a fesse between two chevrons gu., a kibd az. bezaniSe. Boll of E. III. : 
James d*Audeley, gu., afrette or, a labd componSe az, and arg. ; his 
cousin bears the same arms, substituting for the label a bordure 
arg, ; and Hugh, the head of the &amp;mily, bears the firette without 
any difference. Bichard de Grey ^'de Sandiacre," differences 
De Qrey, No. 1 21, p. 35, with a labd gu. bezantSe ; and Bgron, in like 
manner, No. 249, p. 77, is differenced with a labd az. ; Hugh and 
BoBERT DE Menell bear, vairSe arg. and sa., a bendlet gu., the one 
adding a labd gu., and the other a labd componie erm. and gu. ; 
and Edward Ghandos bears, arg., a pHe gu., a labd az. Calais 
Boll : Sir Edward de Montague, erm., three fusUs conjoined in fesse 
gu., a labd of three points or, charged on each point with an eaglet 
vert ; Thomas Clynton (also in Eoll of B. II.), arg. on a chief 
az., two muUets of six points or pierced gu., over aU a labd of three 
points erm.. No. 400 a, PL LXVII. (See p. 184, and No. 400. 

PL xxxvn.) 

Boll of B. n. This Boll records the cadency of no less than 
seven members of the family or Scrope, with the memorable 
shield of the head of the house, Bichard le Scrope, az., a bend or, 
borne by him without any difference. This same shield Henry, 



CADENCY AND DIFFERENCINO. 



226 



William, and John le Scrope seTerally difference with labda of 
three paints argent, gidea and ermine ; a second Henbt, bears, on a 
labd of Uvree points org., as many bars gu, Thomas le Scrope charges a 




No. 50S.— Shield of Sir Edw. db Montague. 

single amntdet sa, npon his sUver label ; while Stephen and another 
kinsman, whose Christian name is not recorded, charge, the one 
a lozenge erm^ and the other a muUet erm., in chief upon the Ordi- 
nary of their shields : a Soil of E. UI. adds, for '' Monsire Wil- 
liam le Sgropb, d^asure, une bend d^or en le point de la bend un lyon 
rampant de paurpre.*' I return to the Labels of the Boll of B. 11. : 
William Marnt bears, gu., a Uon rampt. guard org., a label of 
three points or. Bbynald Luct, gu., semSe of crosslets, three lucies 
haurient, two and one, or, a label of three points az. Thomas de 
Astelet, az. a dnquefoH erm., a labd of three points or, charged 
with two bars gu, John de Aylesbury, az., a cross arg.; and 
Thomas, his son, the same, differenced with a label gu. John 
Clayerino, quarterly or and gu, a label of three points arg. ; and De 
Etton, barry of twelve arg. and gu., a label of three points az., over 
aU a canton so. charged with a cross patonce or. 

Sir Alexander Oiffard, the friend and companion in arms of 
Earl William Longesp^e, whose noble effigy lies, crossed-legged, 
in the fine church of Bojton in Wiltshire, bears, gu., three lions 
pass, in paie arg., a label of five points az.^ charged on each point with 
twofleurs de lys or. This shield, No. 503 a, PI. LXXX, is blazoned 
in the glass of the south-east window. The other chosen comrade 

Q 



226 CADENCY AND DIFFEBENCIKQ. 

of tbe Earl of Salisbury, Sir Eobebt de Yeele, his banner-bearer in 
tbe GroBade, is commemorated by an equally obaracteriBtio efSgy, 
also representing tbe good knigbt orossed-legged, at Sndborongb, 
in tbe same cotrnfy of Wilts. Tbe label companSe org. and az, of 
tbe Nevilles, Earls of Salisbury, I bave already alluded to 
(p. 203), No. 452 c, PL XL. John Boubchier, E.O., Lord Ber- 
ners, A.D. 1475 (Garter-Plate), over Bourchier and Lorraine quar- 
terly ^ in tbe first and fonrtb grand quarters of bis sbield, bas a label 
of tiireepoinU of England^ tbat is, a labd gu,j charged on each point 
wUh ihree luma of England ; No. 673, PI. LXXIY. Tbis nobleman 
became Lord Bernebs, jure uaoris, baving married tbe beiress, 
Margery Bernebs, wbose arms {quarterly or and vert) appear in 
tbe 2nd and 3rd quarters of bis sbield. His fatber's motber was 
Alianore de Lorraine, in wbose rigbt be quarters Lorraine (gu^ 
biUettSe or^ a feaae arg,)^ witb Bourchier. His own motber was 
Anne Plantaoenet, daugbter of Thomas of Woodstock, youngest 
son of Edward III. ; and bence, in reference to bis maternal 
descent from Edward III., be bears bis Labd of England, At 
Ganterbuiy, bis sbield in tbe 4tb quarter bears Bourchier only, 
witbout any label. WiLLLUf Bourchier, Baron Fitz-Waryn, 
brotber of Lord Berners, differences Bourchier witb a Labd of 
France^ also to denote bis descent from Edward III. Henry 
Bourchier, E.O., tbe eldest brotber, wbo married Isabella 
Plantagenef, daugbter of George, Duke of Clarence, was cre- 
ated Earl of Essex and Eu, and bears bis paternal arms witbout 
difference. 

The Courtenays in tbeir arms bave a series of Labels of sin- 
gular interest, from wbicb I select a group of examples. John 
DE GouRTENAY (BoU H. III.) bcars, or^ three torteaux. Hugh de 
CouRTENAY (Caer. RoU), bears, or, ihree iorteaux, a labd of fine 
points az.; and from tbis time tbe Courtenay sbield is always 
cbarged witb a label. Tbis Hugh de Courtenay, tbe eldest son 
of anotber Hugh de Courtenay and of Aldlnore Le Despenckr, 
was created Earl of Devon, and married Agnes de St. John. His 



CADENCY AND DIFFERENCING. 227 

eldest soil) Huoh de Courtenay, second Earl of Deyon, bears the 
iinohai^ged axwre labd, as it had been borne by his father ; he 
married Maroaref de Bohun, granddaughter of Edward I. 
This impaled shield appears in the Brass at Exeter. The second 
son of the first Earl, Bobert de Courtenay, bears an axure labd 
charged with nine goiden muUeU ; his mother, it will be remem- 
bered, was a St. John (See No. 404 a, PI. XXVni.). Sir Hugh, 
E.G., the eldest son of the second Earl, died in his father's life- 
time, haying married Elizabeth de Bryan ; he differences with 
a labd m., hezanUe. His only son and heir, Hugh, married 
Matilda de Holland of Exeter, and he differences with a loibd 
of France, az., fleuretUe ; No. 674, PI. LXXIV. (See No. 477 a, 
PI. LXV. : and see pp. 166, 195.) 

Edward de Courtenay, second son of the second Earl, snc- 
ceeded his &amp;ther as third Earl of DeTon ; he died in 1419, 
haying married Maud de Camoys. His son, Edward, bears 
an aaure labd of three points, each point charged with a plate; 
(See No. 287, PI. XIV.). 

Sir Hugh de Courtenay, third (but second soryiying) son of 
the second Earl, bears a labd of three points c»., charged with nine 
crescents org. ; No. 504, PI. XXXm. (Calais EoU). His son, 
Sir Edward, bears, a labd of three points az., charged with nine 
muUeU pierced or; No. 506, PI. XXXTTT. ; (Brass at Christchnrch 
Cathedral, Oxford, about a.d. 1440). 

The arms of William de Courtenay, Archbishop of Canter- 
bury, fonrih son of the second Earl, haye been already blazoned ; 
(No. 664, PI. LXXIII. ; and p. 217.) 

Sir Philip, fifth son of the second Earl, bears a labd of three 
points az.,pkMe (nine plates) ; No. 505, PL XXXIII. ; he married 
Margaret Wake, and is the direct ancestor of the present Cour- 
TENAYS. His son, Sir William, charges his sUver labd with three 
tarteauac (See No. 437, PL L.). 

Sir Peter de Courtenay, K.G., yonngest son of the second 
Earl of Deyon, differences his shield with a label of three points 

Q 2 



228 



CADENCY AND DIFFERENCINO. 



MX., charged with nine annulets org. ; No. 675, PL LXXIV. (Grarter- 
Plate ; and Brass in Exeter Cathedral.) 

Another Coubtenay label is, a«., guli^ d^or ; and the sons of 
Thomas, fifth Earl of Deyon, who married Maboabet db Beau- 
fort, difference with a Idbd and a hendUi eomponSe org. and az. 
(See No. 479, PI. XXXII. : see also Canterbury shields; Harl. 
M.S. 1366; Seals; Roll of E. II., &lt;fec.) 

The Latymebs have another small gronp of Labels, which thej 
charge as distinct marks of cadency upon the same shield. Wu/- 
LiAM le Latymeb (Cacr. Roll), bears, gu. a cross paionee or. In 
the Roll of E. II., another William le Latymer differences 
this shield (his cross is hlazoned jpattSej^ with a label of three points 
sable, plattSe ; No. 507 ; and his brother, Thomas, has his label, 
also of three points, az., fleurettSe ; No. 508. A third Latymer 
label is sable uncharged. The Roll of R. 11. gives for Thomas 
Latymer a plain label az. ; and two other members of the family 
difference by charging either five escallops scikle, or five martlets 
gules upon their cross. 




No. 507. Na 608. 

Arms of William and Thomas le Lattmbb. 

Thomas Grey, E.G., Marquess of Dorset (son of Elizabeth 
Widville), bears De Grey (No. 121, p. 35), differenced with 
ikree torteava in chiefs and a lable of three points erm, ; and his son, 
Thomas, also bears the same arms. 

A singular Label is assigned to Gaston de Foix, K.G., Count 
of LoNOUEViLLE, Gaptal De Buch, and also to John de Fodc, E.G., 



CADENCY AND DIFFERENCING. 



229 



Visconnt de Chastilion, Gaptal De Buch and Earl of Kendall. 
The arms of both are given as, quarterly, 1 and 4, De Fotx, or, 
three paUeis gu,; 2 and 3, Beamy aa., three garba or ; and these 
shields are differenced with a label having, instead of points, 
three crosses sable depending from it, each cross being charged 
with five escallops arg, (Ashmole). This label, No. 676, PL 
LXXIV., commemorates the marriage of Blanche de Foix with 
John de Greillt, Gaptal De Buch, a.d. 1328, whose arms are, 
cry ana cross sa,, five escaUops arg. 

23. Difference by Augmentation. This most interesting sys- 
tem of Differencing, which, in almost every individual instance 
of its application, is directly associated with History, I have re- 
served for separate treatment in Chapter XXVIII., Section I. 




No. 725. — MOLUWQBTH- 

Baronet, ajd. 1689. 




No. 726.— AflTLEY- 
Baron HAfirriNGS. 




No. 727. 

Habpeb Crewe — Baronet, aj&gt;. 1626. 

(See Chap. XXXI.) 




No. 407.— Shield of Henby V., as Prince of Wales, ftom his Stall-Plate in 
St. Geobob's Chapel, Windsor. 



CHAPTER XVI. 

ROTAL CADENCrr. 

In this Chapter I have considered the Marks of Cadency which 
distingaish the shields of arms of the Plantagenft and Ttjdor 
Princes, with those of the De Beauforts and the De Hollands, 
and also the Differences borne by the members of our own Botal 
Family at the present day. 

I. The Cadency of the Plantagenets. 

The surname of Plantaoenet probably was formally adopted 
and recognized about the close of the fourteenth centory. I 
apply it, however, not only to Edward III. himself, and to his 
descendants, but also to his predecessors and other relatives who 
lived nearer to the time of Henry IL, in order to distinguish, by 
a single well-known family name, all the direct male descendants 
of the same Royal House. 



ROYAL CADENCY. 231 

The Names and principal Titles of the Princes of this Honse 
of Plantagenet are : — 

1. King Henby II. 

The four sons of King Henby IL 

2. Henby, Duke of Normandy. 

3. Eling BiCHABD I. 

4. Oboffbey, Count of Brittany. 

5. King John. 

The only son of Count Geoffrey (No. 4) : — 

6. Abthub, Prince Boyal. 

The two 9on8 of King John (No. 6.) : — 

7. King Henby III. 

8. BiCHABD, Earl of Cornwall, and King of the Romans. 

The two sons of King Henby III. (No. 7) :— 

9. King Edwabd I. 

10. EDMOjn), '* Cronchback," first Earl of Lancaster. 

The three sons ofEcarl Bichabd (No. 8) : — 

11. Henby, of Cornwall. 

12. Bichabd, of Cornwall. 

13. Edmond, second Earl of Cornwall. 

The three sons of King Edwabd I. (No. 9) :— 

14. ELing Edwabd II. 

15. Thomas, " De Brotherton," Earl of Norfolk. 

16. Edmond, " De Wodestook," first Earl of Kent 

The two sons of King Edwabd II. (No. 14) :— 

17. King Edwabd III. 

18. John, •• of Eltham," Earl of Cornwall. 



232 ROYAL CADENCY. 

The six sons of King Edward III. (No. 17) : — 

19. Edward, K.G., " tlie Black Prince," first Prince of Wales, 
Duke of Cornwall and Earl of Chester. 

20. William, "of Hatfield." 

21. Lionel, K.G., "of Antwerp," Duke of Clarence. 

22. John, K.G., " of Ghent," Earl of Derby, second Duke of 
Lancaster. 

23. Edmond, E.g., " of Langley," first Earl of Cambridge, 
and Duke of York. 

24. Thomas, E.G., " of Woodstock," Earl of Buckingham and 
Hereford, Duke of Gloucester. 

The two sons o/ Edmond, Jir«&lt; Earl of Lancaster (No. 10) : — 

25. Thomas, second Earl of Lancaster. 

26. Henry, third Earl of Lancaster. 

2%e only son o/ Henry, third Earl of Lancaster (No. 26) ;— 

27. Henry, first Duke of Lancaster. 

The only son o/ Thomas, Earl of Norfolk (No. 15) :— 

28. Edward, of Norfolk. 

The two sons o/ Edmond, )ir«&lt; Earl of Kent (No. 16) :— 

29. Edmond, second Earl of Eent. 

30. John, third Earl of Eent. 

The two sans of Edward, (he Black Prince (No. 19) :— 

31. Edward, " of AngoulSme." 

32. Eing Richard II., second Prince of Wales. 

The only son {by Mary de Bohun) of John, " of Ohent" (No. 
22):— 

33. Eing Henry IV., "of Bolingbroke." 



ROYAL CADENCY. 233 

I%e Udo sons of Edmond " of Langley,'' (No. 23) :— 

34. Edward, K.G., Earl of Eutland, second Duke of York. 

35. BicuARD, '* of Coningsburgh/' second Earl of Cambridge. 

Hie only son of Thomas, " of Woodstock,'' (No. 24) :-^ 
36.' Humphrey. 

Hie four sons of King Henry IV., (No. 33) :— 

37. King Henry V., third Prince of Wales. 

38. Thomas, K.G., second Dnke of Clarence. 

39. John, K.G., Duke of Bedford, Earl of Bichmond. 

40. Humphrey, E.G., second Duke of Gloucester. 

Hie only son o/Bichard, ** of Chningsburgh,'' (No. 36) : — 

41. Bichard, K.G., third Duke of York, Earl of Cambridge 
and Butland. 

The only son of King Henry V., (No. 37) :— 

42. King Henry VI. 

Tkefour sons of Bichard, third Duke of York, (No. 41) :— 

43. King Edward IV., fourth Duke of York. 

44. Edmond, third Earl of Butland. 

45. George, K.G., third Duke of Clarence. 

46. King Bichard III., third Duke of Gloucester. 

The only son of King Henry VI., (No. 42) :— 

47. Edward, K.G., fourth Prince of Wales. 

The three sons of King Edward IV., (No. 43) :— 

48. King Edward V., fifth Prince of Wales. 

49. Bichard, K.G., fifth Duke of York, &amp;o. 

50. George, second Duke of Bedford. 

The only son of King Bichard III., (No. 46) ;— 

51. Edward, sixth Prince of Wales. 



234 ROTAL CADENCY. 

The only wm o/ George, third Duke of Clarenee, (No. 45) :— 
52. Edward, Earl of Warwick, ihelaaofthe Plantaqenets. 

I now proceed to blazon the Arms of the Plantagenet 
Princes, with their Marks of Cadency. The figures that are 
attached to the names refer to the corresponding figures in the 
foregoing List. 

King Edward I. (9), as Prince Eoyal, " Prt«K&gt;-^ent^t« Begis ;" 
— England, toW^ a loM of five or three points az. ; No. 470, p. 173 : 
EoU of H. III., and Seals. 

King Edward II. (14), as Prince Boyal: — England, teiih a 
label of five or three points az. ; No. 480, PL XLV. : EoUs of E. I. 
and Caer., and Seals. 

King Edward m. (17), as Prince Boyal and Earl of Chester : 
— England, wOh a label of five or three points az, : Boll E. 11., 
Seal A.D. 1327. 

BiCHARD, (8), Earl of Cornwall and Euperor. After he had 

aspired to the Imperial Dignity he was generally styled '^ E^ing 

I of the Bomans;" died in 1272. As Earl, — Poictou, within a bar- 

dure of OomiodU, that is, arg,, a lion rampt, gu,, crowned or, within a 

hordure sa,, hezantSe; No. 194, PL V. As Emperor, — or, an eagle 

I dieplayed, sa. ; No. 677. PL LXXVL 

Edmond, (13), second Earl of Cornwall : — ^the same as his 
father. No. 194. He also bore this shield carried by an eagle 
displayed, as in No. 212 c, PL LXII. ; and having married the 
daughter of the Earl Bichard de Clare, he dimidiated ComwaU 
and Glare, No. 320, PL XVni. : Bolls of H. HI., E. I., E. IL, 
and Caer., Westminster Shields, Seals. This same shield of 
arms, differenced by having the field erm., the bordure engrailed, 
and a silver muUet charged on the shoulder of the 2tb», is borne, aj). 
1443, by Sir John de Cornwall, K.G., Lord Fanhope; No. 433, 
PL LL : Windsor Garter-Plate. 

Edmond, (10), sumamed " Cronohback," first Earl of Lan- 
caster, the younger brother of the King; died 1296 : — England, 




PLATE LXIII. Chapters xiti., xvi, xvni. 

No. 488a. — EflSgy of Henry, First Duke op LAjjCAfirrER, a.d. 1347. 

From the Brass to Sib Hugh Hastings, at Elsyng, Norfolk. 

See pp. 113, 235, and 287. 



EOYAL CADENCY. 235 

with a label of France— a lahei, that is, of three, four, or fivepoints 
ax., fleuretUe; No. 433, PL XLV., and No. 493, PI. XXXIV. 
Earl Edmond appears to have asstuned this lahel as his Difference, 
on his marrii^ with his second Countess, Blanch of Abtois, 
AJ). 1276. 

Thomas, (25), second Earl of Lancabteb: — the same Arms 
and Difference as Earl Edmond his father : what Difference lie 
may have borne during the lifetime of his &amp;ther I am unable 
to show. He himself was executed in 1322. His only brother, 
HsNRY, (26), third Earl of Lancaster, before his accession to 
the Earldom in 1322, bore England, differenced unih a henHet az., 
No. 471, p. 173, and No. 610, Chap. XXIV., Section I. After 
1322, Earl Henry (who died 1345) bore the same Arms and 
Difference as his father and elder brother : Bolls E. L, E. II., 
and Caer., Westminster Monument, Seals. 

Thomas, '* de Brotberton," (15), Earl of Norfolk and Marshal 
of England ; died 1338 i—England, wUh a label of ihree jpoints org, 
Edmond, " de Wodestock," (16), first Earl of Kent ; executed 
in 1329 :— England, wUh a hordure org. ; No. 475, PL XXXH. : 
Boll, of E.II., Seals. 

John, ** of Eltham," (18), Earl of Cornwall, younger brother 
of tbe King; died 1336 :— Inland!, wUk a hordvre of France; 
No. 332, Fl. XIX. : Monument at Westminster. 

Henry, (27), fourth Earl and first Duke of Lancaster, died 
1362 :— before 1345, England, wiih a hendlel az. ; Seal, No. 610 
as Earl, — England, unth a label of three or fitfe jpoinie of France 
also, France Ancient and England quarterly, wiih a label of France 
SeaL It is probable that he assumed ihe quartered arms on his 
accession to the ducal dignity in 1352. In the Calais Boll, 
A.D. 1347, his arms are blazoned as, England, with a labd of 
France ; and in his effigy in the Elsyng Brass, of the same date, 
he appears wearing upon his jupon these arms — ^the arms of all 
his predecessors, the Earls of Lancaster ; No. 488 a, Fl. LXHI. 

Edmond, (29), second Earl of Kent; died without issue, 1333 : 



236 ROYAL CADENCY. 

— «iid John, (80), his brother, third Earl of Kent; died, also 
without issae, 1353 : the same Arms and Difference as their 
fether, No. 475,* PL XXXII. 

The Marks of Cadency borne on their shields by the Sons of 
Edward m. now come under consideration. His eldest son, 
Edward, K.G., (19), the renowned Black Prince, bom at Wood- 
stock, A.D. 1330, Earl of Chester in 1333, (after the death of his 
uncle John, " of Eltham," in 1337,) Duke of Cornwall, in 1343 
was created Prince of Wales; died in 1376, and buried in 
Canterbury Cathedral: — (1.) England^ with a label of five points 
org. ; (2.) France Ancieni and England quarterly, with, a label of 
three points arg. ; No. 339, PL XXXIV., from the Burghersh 
Monument at Lincoln. The quartered shield appears upon the 
Monument of the Prince, and the same arms are blazoned on his 
jupon in his effigy; they appear in enamel colours upon the 
Monument of Edward in., at Eing*s Langley, in the Great 
Yarmouth series, and in his seals ; the shield with England only, 
used as late as the year 1372, appears in seals of the Prince. 
See Cott. MS. Jul. cvii, 158 b, 182 b ; Harl. MS., 2099, 433 b, 1 d. 
14,188 ; and Vincent SS, fol. 88, in Coll. Arm. 

In his Will, the Black Prince gives directions that on the 
occasion of his funeral two distinct armorial compositions should 
be displayed in the procession, immediately before his remains ; 
one, for war — " run pwr la guerre, de noe armea entiera quarteUes " — 
of his quartered arms ; and the other, of his Badge of Ostrich 
Feathers, far peace — '* et Vautre pur la paix, de nos hagee dee 
piUmee d'oOruce, Similar shields *' for war,*' and *' for peace," 
alternate about the monument of the Prince. Each shield *' for 
peace " bears, on a adbh field, three ostrich feathers erect, two and 
one, org,, with labels charged with (he words Ich Dien : No. 234, p. 70. 
In right of his wife, the Princess Joan, the Black Prince would 
impale Ht^nd of Kent; No. 475, Pis. XXXU. and LXV. 

The plain silver label, first adopted by the Black Prince, has 
been borne by all the succeeding Princes of Wales as their 



CADENCY— SHIEI/DS OF THE PI/ANTAGENETS. 



KING EDWARD ID. 




EDIVARD PLANTAGENET 

THE BLACK PRJNCE 




LIONEL PLANTAGENET JOHN PLANTAGENET 

OF ANTWERP OF CHtNT 




EDMOND. THOMAS St 
Fsm/UfSD PLANTAGENET. HENRY PLANTAGENET. 

OF LANGLEY OF LANCASTER 




W^^^^^. 




From theMomiinpnt*uBi:-;/in| B'^'riiEFl-'h' :.':li;).-ijin \i^T.^ugl «;f;.-u^l%60 



XXJ.iV 



KOYAL CADENCY. 237 

Special armorial distinction. The Black Prince himself stands 
at the head of the group of historical Princes of Wales, his 
grandfather Edwabd II., having borne that title only by virtue 
of a romantic legend. The Caerlaverock EoU, which gives a 
graphic sketch of Prince Edwabd, the eldest son of King 
Edwabd I., then " a youth of seventeen years of age and bearing 
arms for the first time," in proclaiming the style of the Kjno 
himself is careful to entitle him ** Pbince of Wales." In like 
manner, Edwabd 111. before his accession was Earl of Chester, 
but not Prince of Wales. 

The Pbinces op Wales of the House of Plantaoenet are as 
follows : — 

1. The Black Prince. 

2. Hichard, son of the Black Prince, afterwards Richard II. 

3. Henry, son of Henry IV., afterwards Henry V. 

4. Edward, son of Henry VI. 

5. Edward, son of Edward IV., afterwards Edward V. 

6. Edward, son of Bighard IU. 

The last four of these Princes bear the silver label charged upon 
France Modem and England quarterly, as in No. 487, p. 230, the 
shield of Henry V., as Prince of Wales, from his Garter-Plate in 
St. George's Chapel. 

No armorial insignia appear to have been assigned to Prince 
William, (20), second son of Edward III., who died young, and 
was buried in York Cathedral, where his effigy still remains. 

Lionel, (21), third son of Edward III., Duke of Clarence; 
died 1368: — France Ancient and England quarterly, with a label 
of eiAerfive or ihree points^ the label itself being charged with certain 
devices for secondary difference. One of the shields upon the 
Burghersh Monument, No. 490, PI. XXXIV., has been assigned 
to Prince Lionel; this label is of five points, and a single cross 
is blazoned on each point; and it has been suggested that this 
may have been a Labd of Ulster — that is, or, charged on each point 



I 

r 

238 ROTAL CADEKCT. 

with a cro88 gu. Lionel married the heiress of Ulster in 1352, 
and in 1355 he became Earl of Ulstee, jure uaooris. The same 
ladj, Elizabeth de Bubgh, was also co-heiress of the De Clares, 
■and in 1362 her husband was created Dnke of Clarence^ when 
he appears to have assumed a mlver Labd, charged on each poini 
with a canton gules — ^such a canton being reputed to be an ancient 
bearing of the femily of De Clare. At St. Alban's, as I have 
ahready mentioned, there remains a shield of France Ancient and 
England^ differenced with a Labd of three paints org., on each point 
a canton gu. ; No. 473, PL XXXI. Among other authorities for 
the label borne by this Prince, reference has commonly been 
made to the small enamelled shield, the third in the series, 
th4l remains beneath one of the ** Weepers " on the south side of 
the monument of Edward III., in Westminster Abbey. In 
No. 489, PI. XXXI., I give a facsimile (engraved from my own 
tracing) of the original of the label blazoned upon this shield, 
from which it appears that each point is charged with a canton • 
guies (or rather a billet), interposed between two torieaux. The 
original shield is of metal, and the changes upon the label are 
formed of a vitreous paste, inlaid in matrices sunk for its recep- 
tion, the paste itself having been raised so as to represent these 
small charges in relief upon the polished silver of the label. 

! It is singular that a correct description of this remarkable label 

I should not have been before given. The original is open for 

examination, and it does not appear to be possible that it 

I should have been subjected to any alteration ; unless, indeed, in 

the first instance, this label bore three torteaua ; and afterwards, 

I on the union of the houses of York and Clarence by the marriage 

of BiCHARD Plantaqenet " of Couingsburgh " with Anne Mor- 

\ TIMER, the central torteau of York was cut away, and the canton 

of Clarence made to assume its place. This suggestion would 
assign both this shield in its original condition, and the statuette 
above it, to Edmond Plantagenet " of Langley," and not to his 

] elder brother Lionel. In right of his wife, Elizabeth de Boroh, 



CADENCY IrABEIfS OF -T-EE PJ^KTA^GENETS. 

CHAPTER ^Vi 



I 




ii 



ii 



^ 



^i 



Ii 



n 



1*1 lii lij 



TO 



3 3 S 



I 



1 



I* 

iiJ LiJ 



t 



^-late XXX: 



I 



1 




BOTAL CADENCY. 239 

Fnnce Lionel would impale De Burgh of UhUt — cVy a cross gu, : 
Monnments at WeBtminster, Langley^ and Lincoln. 

John, " of GhenC (22), fourth son of Edward III, K.Q., 
Duke of Lancaster and King of Castile and Leon ; died Feb. 3, 
1399 i—ISranee Aneieni and England, wUk a label of three points 
ermine. This label may be blazoned *' of Brittany ^'^ having been 
derived from the ermine canton borne hy John de Dreux, Count 
of Brittany and Earl of Bichmond, on whose death, in 1342, the 
Earldom of Bichmond was conferred hy Edward III. on his 
infant son, Prince John. The ermine label is generally blazoned 
with ihree spots on eachpokit, as in No. 494, PL XXXI., the spots 
being in pale: a different arrangement has been shown in 
No. 468, at St. Alban's ; and again, at Great Yarmouth; in No. 469 ; 
at Lincoln also, the same label appears charged with two spots 
only upon each point, No. 491, PL XXXIV. John of Ghent 
was created Duke of Lancaster in 1362, and in the following 
year Earl of Debbt, Lincoln, and Leicester : also, on his mar- 
riage with Constance of Castile, he assumed the title of King 
of Castiue and Leon. He impales the arms of his first wife, 
Blanche of Lancaster, No. 488, PL XLY. : he afterwards impales 
CastUe and Leon^ No. 135, PL I., placing his Boyal coat on the 
dexter side of his shield. He also bears, sa,, three ostrich feathers 
erm., the qwUs and scrolls or : Seals ; Monuments at Canterbury, 
Westminster, and Lincoln ; Boll of B. II. 

Bdmond, " of Langley," (23), fifth son of Edward III., K.G. 
Duke of York ; died 1402 : — France Ancient and England quarterly, 
with a Idbet of three points org., charged on each point tciih torteaux ; 
these torteauz are generally blazoned three on each point, as in 
No. 496, PI. XXXI. : but in No. 472, from Great Yarmouth, the 
torteauz on each point of this label are two only. The seals 
of this Prince and his stall-plate blazon his label with three 
torteaua on each point ; and his label appears charged in the same 
manner upon his monument at King's Langley. A label counter 
componSe or chequSe, (probably derived from the well-known 



240 ROYAL CADENCY. 

shield of De Warrenne, (No. 127 b, PL VI.), carved upon the 
Burghersh monument, No. 492, PI. XXXIY., has been attributed 
to Edmond of Langley, and is considered to have been borne by 
him before he assumed what may be distingaished as the LcM 
of York — the silver label, that is, charged with torteauz. The 
origin of this difference by torteaux is by no means easy to be 
determined. Three torteaux, however, were borne in chief by 
Thomas, Lord Wake of Lydel, {or, two bars gu.^ tn chief three 
torteoauD, No, 437, PI. L.), whose sister and sole heiress married 
another Edmond Plantagenjct, the youngest son of Edward I. 
This Edmond was executed in 1329, being then twenty* eight 
years of age ; his two sons died withont issue, and thus his only 
daughter became the sole heiress of both her father and her 
mother. This lady, the Princess Joan, married, first. Sir Thomas 
Holland, E.G., and afterwards, the Black Prince. Sir Thomas 
Holland was created Lord Wake of Lydel, jture uxorie ; his eldest 
son, Thomas Holland, bore the same title; and the second 
daughter of his eldest son, Joan Holland, after the year 1394, 
married Prince Edmond of Langley, then Duke of York. In 
default of any more probable theory, I venture to suggest that 
the torteaux of the York Label may possibly have been derived 
from the shield of Wake of Lydd, No. 437, through Edmond of 
Woodstock and the Hollands. Very strange were both the 
distribution and the combination of titles, and the assignment of 
estates and properties in those days ; so that in the torteaux of 
the York Label there may linger evidence of a part, and perhaps 
by no means an unimportant part of the wealth which supported 
the Dukedom of York at the time of its first creation. That 
Prince Edmond of Langley attached very great importance to his 
alliance with the Hollands is declared by the presence of two 
shields, charged with the arms of JBbSand, upon his monmnent 
at Ring's Langley. These two shields, the one bearing Engh/nd 
within a hordure of France, and the other England within a plain 
hordure, I have recently liberated from the thick coverings of 



BOTAL CADENCY. 241 

mortar which had long completely concealed them; they are 
admirably drawn and carved with great spiiit and delicacy in 
alabaster, and (thanks to the mortar) they remain in perfect 
preservation. The exact time in which Edmond of Langley 
adopted the label charged with torteaux, has not yet been de- 
termined : he sealed with this label, however, before his advance 
to the Dukedom of York in 1385, (see Vincent, " Nicholas 
Charles," f. 97, in Coll. Arm.) ; and torteaux are certainly upon 
the label, No. 489, PL XXXI., blazoned on the Monument of 
Edward III. The Garter-Plate of Prince Edmond is differenced 
with a label charged veith nine torteaux, and (at whatever period 
the existing plate may have been executed) its inscription de- 
signates the Prince by his title of Duke of York — ** le Duk de 
York Edmody Still further inquiry, perhaps, may positively 
determine the source from whence the torteaux of the York 
label were derived, and may also assign an exact date to the 
assumption of that label, in the place of its compony predecessor, 
by Edmond of Langley. 

Prince Edmond was created Earl of Cambridge in the year 1362, 
and Duke of York in 1385. He impales Castile and Lean, in right 
of his wife, Isabel, younger daughter of Peter, King of Castile 
and Leon : BoU of R. II. ; Seals ; Monuments ; Canterbury shields. 

Thomas, " of Woodstock," (24,) yoimgest son of Edward III., 
K.G., Duke of Gloucester : — France Andent and England quarterly^ 
within a bordwe arg., No. 340, PL XX., (from the De Bohun 
Brass at Westminster) ; also No. 609, PI. LXX. (See his other 
seals). He was created Earl of Buckingham in the year 1377, 
and, jure uxoris. Earl of Essex and Northampton ; and in 1386, 
he was created Duke of Buckingham. Murdered at Calais in 
1397. He impales, for his wife Allanore de Bohun, the arms 
of the Earls of Hereford, as in No. 340 : Canterbury Shields ; 
Boll B. n. 

Bichard, Prince of Wales, (32,) afterwards King Bichard II : 
in the lifetime of the Black Prince, his father, France Ancient 



242 BOYAL CADENCY. 

and England, vfiih a labd of five or three points org., charged on (he 
central point only with a cross gu.^ No. 485, Fl. XXXI. 

Henby " of Bolingbroke," (33), K.G., Earl of Derby, Here- 
ford and Lancaster, afterwards Kino Henry IV., only son of 
John of Ghent : England with a labd of France — the shield of the 
Earls of Lancaster, whom he represented. No. 488, PL XLV., 
and No. 493, Fl. XXXIV. This shield appears to have been 
home, as an official ensign, bj many persons who were in yarions 
ways connected with the Lancastrian Princes. A good example 
oocnrs in the Brass to Thomas Leventhorpe, a.d. 1433, at Saw- 
bridgeworth : See Chap. XXIII. The Labd of France^ assumed 
after his marriage with Blanche D'Artois by Edmond " Grouch- 
back," was evidently derived from the paternal aims of the 
French Princess ; and thus it may be grouped with the Bordwre 
of France of John of Eltham, and the Bordure cf England of John 
de Dreux, Count of Brittany, as an example of that early 
Cadency whidi anticipated Marshalling. 

After the death of his &amp;ther, February 3, 1399, until his own 
accession on the 30th September following, Henry Bolingbroke 
bears, France Ancieni and England quarterly, wiA a labd of five 
points per pale qf Brittany and o/JVance— that is, the three dexter 
points ermine, and the two sinister points azure charged with 
golden fleurs de lys. This label, which is formed by impaling 
his father^s labd with his own, appears upon a Seal of Prince 
Henry to a charter dated 18 Eich. II., (Vincent, 33 — 96, in Coll. 
Arm.) Upon the monument at King's Langley, this label has 
the first and second point ermine, and points three, four and five 
of France, as in No. 486, at the end of this Chapter. At Great 
Yarmouth, points one, two and three are ermine, as in No. 495, 
Fl. XXXni. Prince Henry was created Earl of Derby in 1386 ; 
and in right of his wife, Mary de Bohun, Earl of Hereford and 
Baron Brecknock, and in 1397 he was created Duke of Herefx^rd: 
he succeeded his father as Duke of Lancaster, February 3, 
1399. On the Seal already described (p. 164), he impales the 



BOTAL CADENCY. 243 

Confessor with a label of three points with his quartered shield, 
and again impales De Bohun, No. 347, p. 165: Oanterbniy 
Shields; Boll of B. II. 

Edward, (84), BLG., Earl of Butland in 1390, Dnke of Al- 
bemarle in 1398, and second Dnke of Tore in 1402, eldest son 
of Edmond of Langley; killed at Agincourt, 1415: — ^before the 
death of his fetther, — France Ancient and England quarierly^ wUh a 
labd of CkuiUe — a label gu., charged on each point with three castles 
oTy in commemoration of his mother, Isabelle of Castile and 
Leon, No. 498, PI. XXXIII. Vincent (No. 18, f. 88) assigns 
to this Prince at this period a label per pale of OasUle and Leon, 
as in No. 499 ; and the Boll of Biohard II., (a.d. 1392&gt;-1397) 
blazons the aims of ^ Le Conte de Buttlande '* with a label of 
Jive points per pale of Torh and Castile^ — ^points one, two and three 
org, having three iorieaux ohaiged on each point ; and points fonr 
and five gules having on each point ihree oasUes or. No. 499 a, 
PL LXXIV. After the death of his father. Prince Edward bears 
the label of Torh (with nine torteanx) only, and eyentnally he 
snbstitntes France Modem for IVanee Ancient in the first and 
fourth quarters of his shield. This Prince, for his wife Philippa, 
daughter of Lord Mohun, impales, or, a cross engrailed so, ; Monu- 
ment at Westminster ; Canterbury Bosses ; Seals. 

BiCHARD, '* of Coningsburgh," (35,) Earl of Cambridge, second 
and youngest son of Edmond of Langley: executed in 1415: — 
before 1402, France Ancient and England quarterly vfitJUn a hordure 
of Leon — a boidure org., charged with lioncds rampt. gu. (or, 
purptire), in commemoration of his mother. After 1402 he adds 
the label of York (with nine torteaux) voiQiin his hordure; and 
eventually he changes France Andent for France Modem, No. 478, 
PI. XXXIL; Seals; Canterbury Bosses. For his wife Anne 
Mortimer, this Prince impales Martmer and De Burgh quarterly, 

Thomas, (38,) E.G., Duke of Clarence, second son of Henrt 
IV.; killed in battle in Anjou, March 22, 1421 1— France Modem 
and England, with a labd ermine, charged on each point with a canton 

R 2 



244 ROYAL CADENCY. 

gu.. No. 500, PI. XXXI. Before his advance to the Dukedom of 
Clarence in 1411, this Prince appears to have borne his label cf 
ermine ofdy without the cantons; Seals; Stall-Plate; Monument 
at Canterbury. He impales HoUand of Kent, No. 477 a. PI. 
XL v., for his wife Margaret de Holland. 

John (39), K.G., Duke of Bedford (in 1415), Anjou and 
Alen^on, Earl of Bichmond, &amp;o., third son of Henry IV. ; died 
at Bouen in 1435 : — France Modem and England, with a Idbd im- 
paling Brittany and France, No. 486, p. 253. This label, as I 
have shown, was borne by the father of Duke John between 
February 3, and September 30, 1399; consequently it maybe 
assumed that he did not difference his own shield with it until 
after his father had become king. Duke John without doubt, 
and his elder brother also, in the first instance bore France 
Ancient, Duke John would bear the label of ermine, as the ensign 
of his own Earldom of Bichhond, and also to denote his descent 
from "time-honoured Lancaster," Prince John of Ghent, his 
grandfather, whose name he himself bore ; and the label charged 
with flours de lys he would also bear, as the distinguishing label 
of Lancaster, while at the same time the fleurs de lys might 
further refer to his own alliances with two Princesses connected 
with France. His elder brother, the Duke of Clarence, may be 
considered in like manner to have assumed the ermine labei, as a 
grandson of John of Ghent ; and the cantons he may be considered 
to have regarded as the difference of Clarence. In the Garter- 
Plate of the Duke of Bedford, his lion crest is gorged with a label 
of five points, identical in its character with the label ttiat dif- 
ferences his shield. This Prince was twice married; first, to 
Anne, sister of Philip, Duke of Burgundy ; and, secondly, to 
Jaqueline of Luxemburg, who subsequently became the wife of 
Sir Richard Widville, and mother of Elizabeth, the Queen of 
Edward IV. : he, therefore, impales Burgundy-^France Ancient, 
within a hordure gu. ; and Luxemburg — org,, a lion rampt, queue four- 
chee gu., crowned or. Seals ; Canterbury Bosses, &amp;c. 



ROYAL CADENCY. 245 

Humphrey, (40,) K.G., Duke of Gloucester, youngest son of 
Henry IV. ; died 1447 .—France Modem and England, toithin a 
hardure org., No. 476, PI. XXXII. ; Monument at St. Alban's; 
Canterbuiy Bosses; Seals. Duke Humphrey impales, for his 
first wife, Jaqueline of Holland, or, a lion rampt. gu, ; and, for 
his second wife, Eleanor de Cobham, Cobham, No. 377, PL XXV. 
In his " PttWMtmn/," (p. 160,) Mr. Planch^ blazons the bordure 
of Humphrey, Duke of Gloucester, as componie argent and aable : 
perhaps he has done this on the authority of Upton, who says 
{Be miU, off. p. 238), that the Duke bore such a bordure, which he 
might have assumed when the Earldom of Flanders was granted 
to him in the fourteenth year of Henry VI. The shield of the 
Duke in the cloisters at Canterbury has a plain bordure ; and in 
his Monument at St. Alban's his shield is repeated again and 
again, carved in relief, but the bordure is plain. Many of 
tiiese shields at St. Alban*s are in perfect preservation, and 
they are ensigned with a coronet decorated after a most singular 
manner. The Duke also differences his Lion Crest with a CoUar 
argent. 

Richard, (41,) K.G., Earl of Cambridge and Rutland, third 
Duke of York in 1426, Regent of Franco in 1435, only son of 
Earl Richard of Coningsburg ; killed at Wakefield December 31, 
1460 : — France Modem and England quarterly, with a label of York 
(nine torteaux) ; Garter-Plate ; Seals — see Vincent, MS. SS., in 
Coll. Arm. For his wife, Cecilia Neville, this Prince impales, 
gu., a saUire org. 

Edward, (43,) Earl of March, fourth Duke of York (in 1460), 
afterwards King Edward IV., eldest surviving son of Richard, 
third Duke of York :— after his father's death, France Modem and 
England quarterly, with a label of York.. I have not been able to 
ascertain what label this Prince bore during the lifetime of his 
father. 

Edmond, (44,) Earl of Rutland, second son of Richard, third 
Duke of York; killed at Wakefield, Dec. 31, 1460:— JVanw 



246 BOYAL CADENCY. 

Modem and England with a labd of five points per pale cf Leon and 
Toth, No. 497, PI. XXXHL 

Gboboe (45), ELG.| Duke of Clabence, and jwre vseoris Earl of 
Warwick and Salisbury, third son of Richard, third Duke of 
York; murdered in 1477 : — France Modem and England^ ioUh a 
labd of Clarence^ — a label arg,^ charged on each point vfUh a canton 
gu.. No. 473, PI. XXXI. Garter-Plate; Canterbury Bosses; 
Seals. For his wife, Isabelle Neville, he impales, gu.^ a eaUire 
arg.^ with a labd of three points componie org. and (u. 

Richard, (46,) K,G., Duke of Gloucester, afterwards Kiwu 
Richard IIL, fourth son of Richard, third Duke of York ; killed 
at Bosworth Field, August 23, 1485 i-— France Modem and England 
quarterly^ with a kibd erm.^ charged on each point wUh a canton gu,. 
No. 500, PL XXXI.; Garter-Plate; Ganterbuiy Bosses, &amp;o. 

Richard, (49,) E.G., fifth Duke of York, Norfolk and War- 
RENNE, Earl of Nottingham, second son of Edward IY : — France 
Modem and England^ with a labd of three points arg.^ the first point 
charged with a canton gn,^ No. 464, PI. XXXI; Garter-Plate; 
Canterbury Bosses. 

Edward, (52,) Earl of Warwick, eldest and only surviying son 
of Georoe, Duke of Clarence, ihe last of ike Plantagenels ; exe- 
cuted Nov. 28, 1499 : — France Modem and England^ wiih a labd 
of Beaufort — a label componie org, and 02., No. 601, PL XXX L 
This label Earl Edward derived, through his mother, from the 
Nevilles, Earls of Warwick, who in their turn had assumed 
it to denote their own alliance with the House of Beaufort. 

In their Seals, the Plantaoenet Princes both impale the arms 
of their Consorts witb their own, and they also marshal various 
quarterings. I have not considered it necessary to give quBi- 
tered coats, my special object in the foregoing series of shields 
being to indicate the several Labels that were borne by different 
members of the Plantaoenet family, as Marks of Cadency. I 
add, as an example of these Quarterings, the arms blazoned on 
one of the Seals of Bichard, third Duke of York : Quarterly, 1 



CAD^HGY IrABEI/S . 

CHAPTr.R XV: 




&lt;^ 



I 




Pis'-. :&lt;x;'k: 



MARSHAl/I/IXG &amp;: CADEXCY 



"EAT-iZF-^ &gt;::v ky:: 










HOLIi.\^•D ANOENT. 



*Mr¥^ih* UW 



.... i*^\# 

HOLLAND ofEXETKH 



» # #_ # 





CdNFESSOR. MO^VBRAY. rONFESflOR HOLLAND 




ROYAL CADENCY. 247 

and 4, Torh ; 2. CaMe and Leon ; 8. Mortimer and De Burgh quar- 
terly ; and, over aUj HoUand of Kent, 

n. Cadency of the De Hollands. 

In the time of Edward I., Bobert de Holland married Maxtd, 
daughter and co-heiress of Alan de la Zouche. Of their four 
sons, Thomas the second son, and Otho the yonngest^ were Knights 
Fonnders of the Garter. This Sir Thomas de Holland, E.G., 
married Joan Plantaqenet {who afterwards was the wife of the 
Black Prince) ; and his two sons, accordingly, were half-bro- 
thers of BiCHARD n. In the Calais Boll, Sir Thomas bears his 
paternal arms, az.f fleurettie^ a lion rampt. guard, arg.^ No. 637, 
PL LXY., differenced with a ereaceni gu. ; and Sir Otho differences 
with an annulet gu, 

Thomas de Holland, KG., second Earl of Kent, and second 
Baron Wake jure maJbrU^ eldest son of Sir Thomas ; died in 
1397, having married Alice de Fitz-Alan: England^ within a 
hordure org.. No. 476, Pis. XXXH. and LXV.; EoU of R H.; 
Canterbury Bosses; King's Langley Monnment; Seals, &amp;c. 
Also, by a special grant from Bichard II., the same arms, tfii- 
jpaled by the Canfeseor within a hordure erm.; No. 342, PI. XXII.; 
Seals. 

Thomas de Holland, third Earl of Kent, and Dnke of Surret, 
eldest son of Earl Thomas; executed in 1400: — England^ within 
a hordure org. ; No. 476, PL LXV. 

Edmund de Holland, K.G., fourth and last Earl of Kent, 
second son of Earl Thomas : the same arms as his &amp;ther and 
brother. 

John de Holland, K.G., Earl of Huntingdon and Duke of 
Exeter, second son of Sir Thomas; executed in 1400, having 
married Elizabeth, daughter of John, ''of Ghent:" England^ 
within a hordure of France; No. 447 A, Plates XLV. and LXY. ; 
Boll B. II.; King's Langley Monument; Canterbuiy Bosses; 
Seals. Also, by special grant from Bichard II., the same arms 



248 BOTAL CADENCY. 

impaled by the Chrrfessor, differenced by a label of three pwnU org.; 
No. 631, PL LXV. 

John de Holland, K.G., second Duke of Exeteb and Earl of 
Huntingdon, second son of John, the first Duke : the same anxiB 
as his father, without the Confessor. 

John de Holland, third and last Duke of Exeter, only son of 
the second Duke : the same arms as his father. 

III. Cadency of the De Beaufobts. 

In the year 1397, the Act for the legitimation of the De Beau- 
forts, the SODS of John of Ohent and Catherine Swtnfobd, was 
passed and became law. 

John de Beaufort, E.G., Earl and Marquess of Somerset, and 
Marquess of Dorset, the eldest son : — ^before the year 1397, per 
pale arg, and az,^ a bend of England ensigned with a label of France ; 
(see Chap. XXYIII., Section 2) ; after 1397, France and England^ 
(at first, France^ Ancient), within a bordure componee arg. and cu., 
(the Plantagenet colours), No. 479, PI. XXXII. 

Henry de Beaufort, Cardinal, Bishop of Winchester, and 
Lord Chancellor, the second son : — ^before 1397, the same arms 
differenced with a crescent ; after 1897, France and England, tnthin 
a bordure componSe az. and arg., a crescent of the last for secondary 
Difference ; No. 480, PL XXXII. Nicholas Charles gives a seal 
of the Cardinal (p. 127), in which his shield has the bordure 
componee arg. and az., the central az. square in chief being charged 
with a mitre or. 

Thomas de Beaufort, K.G., Duke of Exeter, Earl of Dorset 
and of Harcourt in Normandy, the third son : — ^before 1397, as 
his two brothers, for difference a muUel; after 1397, and until 
1417, France and England, within a bordure componee az. and erm., or 
erm. and az. ; after 1417, the bordure componee arg. and of IVance, 
or of France and arg. (the fleurs de lys from the Hollands), No. 

484, PI. xxxn. 

John de Beauforx, K.G., and Edmond de Beaufort, sons of the 



CADE:N"C Y - BORDURES. 



'HAPTSPS :c/i 3c xrr. 




M 

* 


^ 


^ 

^ 


w 



'Jli 



BOTAL CADENCY. 249 

first John de Beaufx&gt;rt, and both of them in succession Dukes of 
Somerset, and also Henby and Edmond de Beaufort, sons of the 
first Edmond, and Dukes of Somerset, bear the same arms with 
the bordure compon^e either arg. and az,^ or az. and arg.y with 
either a label or a muUet charged over all for secondary diflference ; 
Garter-plates ; Seals ; Monnments at Canterbury, and at West- 
minster and Wimbome Minsters, &amp;c. 

IV. Cadency of the Tudors. 

Edmund Tudor, "of Hadham," Earl of Richmond in 1452, 
eldest son of Queen Catherine and Owen Tudor : France Modem 
and England, mthln a hordure az., charged aUemaidy voithflmrs de 
lys and marOets or; No. 482, PI. XXXII. He died, a.d. 1466, 
having married in the previous year Margaret, the only child 
of John de Beaufort, first Duke of Somerset, and his wife, Mar- 
GARCT Beauchamp of Blctsho, from whose arms (No. 369. PI. 
XXV), he obtained the martleta of his bordure, as the fleurs de 
lys were derived from the Hollands; Westminster Monu- 
ment. 

Jaspar Tudor, K.G., Earl of. Pembroke in 1452, and in 1485 
Duke of Bedford, second son of Queen Catherine and Owen 
Tudor : France Modem and England, within a hordure az., charged 
with martlets or; No. 483, PI. XXXU. ; Garter-plate; Seals, &amp;c. 
A grant of land in the county of Monmouth from Jaspar Tudor 
bears his seal, charged with his arms; No. 683; see Chapter 
XXIV., Section 1. 

Henry Tudor, afterwards King Henry VH :— before his 
accession, Aug. 22, 1485, the same as his father, Edmund Tudor, 
No. 482, PL XXXn. ; Monument at Westminster ; Seals. 

Arthur Tudor, K.G., Prince op Wales, eldest son of Henry YH., 
died in 1502 -.^France Modem and England, wUh a label of three 
points arg. ; Monument in Worcester Cathedral ; Seals. 

Henry Tudor, E.G., afterwards King Henry Vni.:~before 
1502, France Modern and England, mih a label of three points erm. ; 



250 BOTAL CADENCY. 

Stall-plate; after 1502 and until his acoession in 1509, as 
Prikce of Wales, the same arms with a silver leM, 

Edward Tudoe, afterwards King Edward VL:— before hia 
accession in 1207, France and England, mth a Idbd org. As nomi- 
nally Prince of Wales also, on one of his seals he bears, as the 
arms of the Principality, Three Uona coward in pale. No. 699, 
PL LX : and a similar shield is also blazoned upon a seal of 
Edward V., as Prince of Wales. See Chapter XXIV. 

The succession of the Princes of Wales from the last of the 
TuDORS is as follows ; they all difference the Boyal Arms of their 
own period with a Mver lahd ofikree poinU : — 

Henry Stuart, Prince of Wales in 1610 ; No. 537, PL LVm., 
with the diver label, 

Charles Stuart, afterwards Charles I., Prince of Wales in 
1612 ; the same arms and difference. 

Charles Stuart, afterwards Charles II., Prince of Wales in 
1639 ; the same arms and labeL 

OeoroeII.; Frederick Lewis; and QboroeIII; snccessiTely 
Princes of Wales : No. 542, PL LIX., with the nlver label. 

Oborge IY., the same arms and difference till 1801; from 
1801 till 1816, No. 543, with the Electoral Bonnet &lt;f Hanover, 
No. 542 A, PL LXXYL, instead of the Boyal Crown, and the nlver 
label; and from 1816 till ^his accession 1820, No. 543, and the 
same difference of a silver label. 

H.R.H., The Princess Charlotte Augusta of Wales, Daughter 
of Geo. IV. : On a lozenge the Boyal Arme (without the Crown of 
Charlemagne, and without the Electoral Boimet) with a label of 
three points arg., on the central point a rose gu^ The Coronet of 
crosses patties, fleurs de lys and daooil leanes, (No. 565). The Boyd 
Supporters wUh the same label and coronet. These arms thus dif- 
ferenced were assigned to the Princess April 16, 1816 : and in 
1818 a similar label, but of five points, was granted to the hus- 
band of H.R.H., the Prince Leopold, now King of the Belgians. 



BOTAL CADENCT. 251 

YII. Jambs' Stuakt, (afterwards James II.,) E.G., as Duke of 
York : (he BoycH Arms of ike Stuarts^ No. 537, PL LXIII., with 
a Ubd of ihreejmnta erm, Garter-Plate^ a.d. 1642. 

yill. Prince Geoboe of Denmark, husband of Queen Aswr : 
Denmark, as borne by Akne, Queen of James I., with a Idbd of 
ihreejpoinis erm, 

William Stuart, E.G., son of Queen Anne, styled Duke of 
Gloucester : M^ Boyal Arms of the Quarts, with a label of three 
points org,, charged on the central point wiih a cross gu. Supporters 
and Crest differenced with the same label, and both the lions en- 
signed with the Prince's own Coronet. Garter-Plate, a.d. 1695. 

IX. Cadency of the present Botal Family. 

1. The Family of Geoboe IIL :— 

H.RH., The Prince of Wales, E.G. : No. 568, PL XXXVI. 

H.RH., Frederick, Duke of York : No. 485, PL XXXI. 

H.H.H., William Henry, Duke of Clarence : No. 569. 

H.B.H., Edward, Duke of Eent : No. 570. 

H.B.H., Ernest Augustus, Duke of Cumberland: on a label of 
three points org,, afieur de lys az, between two crosses gu, 

H.H.H., Augustus Frederick, Duke of Sussex : on a Ubd of 
three points org,, two hearts in pale between four crosses all gu, 
* H.B.H., Adolphus Frederick, Duke of Cambridge : No. 577, 
PL XXXVI. 

H.RH., Charlotte Augusta Matilda, Princess Botal: No. 
572. 

H.B.H., The Princess Augusta: No. 573. 

H.B.H., The Princess Elizabeth : No. 574. 

H.B.H., The Princess Mart: No. 575. 

H JLH., The Princess Sophia : No. 576. 

H.B.H., The Princess Amelia : a rose between two hearts gu, 

2. H.RH., William Henry, Duke of Gloucester, third son of 
Frederick Lewis, Prince of Wales : on a label offivepoinis org,, a 
fleur de lys ax. between four crosses gu. 



252 ROTAL CADENCY. 

H.B.H., WiLTXUf Frederick, Duke of Gloucester : the same 
label aa the last ; and, during his Other's lifetime, henecUh U a 
second label of three points arg, 

3. The Family of Her Majesty, The Queen. 

H.RH., The late Prince Consort : — a label of three points arg.^ 
charged on the central point with a dross gu, 

H.B.H., Albert Edward, K.G., Prince of Wales, K.S.I. ; a 
label of three points org. 

The Princes and Princesses, the younger Sons and all the 
Daughters of the Queen, difference Oie Boyal Arms of England 
with silver labels of three points, each of which is charged with its 
own Marks of Cadency in the order following : — 

H.RH., The Prince Alfred : on the first and third points, an 
anchor az,, on the central point a cross gu,, No. 569. 

' H.B.H., The Prince Arthur : a cross gu,, between two fleurs de 
lys az., No. 570, PI. XXXVI. 

H.II.H., The Prince Leopold : a cross between two hearts, all gu,. 
No. 571. 

H.E.H., The Princess Botal : a rose, between two crosses aU gu.. 
No. 572. 

H.B.H., The Princess Alice: a rose gu,, between two ermine 
spots. No. 573. 

H.E.H., The Princess Helena : a cross, between two roses, aJl 
gu.. No. 574. 

H.R.H,, The Princess Louisa : a rose, between two cantons, aU 
gu,, No. 575. 

H.R.H., The Princess Beatrice : a heart, between two roses, aU 
gu,. No. 676. 

I presume that in due time his grandfather's label (No. 485, 
PL XXXI.) will be assigned to the infant Prince, Albert Victor, 
the eldest son of the Prince of Wales, as that same label was 
borne by Eichard, afterwards Kichard II., when he was the eldest 
surviving son of Edward, the Black Prince, Prince of Wales. 

4. The label of Cambridge is charged on the central point with 



B.OYKL CXDEXCY &amp;r BRITISH EKSIGNS. 

CHAI-TERS X'vTII .XIX 



HH.H. THE PRINCE OF WALfS. H H.H. THE PRINCIISS BOYAL. 



tpttt leans 

M.RJf. THE PRiyCE ALFRED. H.R^.THE PRINCESS ALICE. 

H.R.HTHE PRiyCE ARTHVR H.R.H.THE PRINCESS HELENA . 
HR.H.THE PRINCE LEOPOLD H R H. THE PRINCESS LOUISA. 

l!T¥''l!D 



W 



H.R.N. THE DUKE OP CAMBRIDGE. H.R.H.THE PRINCESS BEATRICK 




IfTRED ENSIGN. ^2?? RED ENSIGN. 3^P RED ENSIGN 



SE 



as 



BLUE ENSIGN 



^ 



^ 



rraiTE.or ST GEORGE'S ENSKiN 



J 




F.Ht» XXXT, 



ttOYAL CADENCY. 253 

the Cross of St. Oeorge, and on each of the two other points with 
two hearts inpcde gu, ; No. 677, PI. XXXVI. 

Marks of Cadency for Princesses were first introduced into 
England on the accession of the present Boyal Family to the 
Crown of these Eealms. Before this period, the Daughters and 
and Grand-Daughters of the Crown bore the Eoyal Arms withoui 
difference^ in a lozenge if unmarried, (see Monuments to Daugh- 
ters of James I., at Westminster); or in impalement with the 
arms of their Husbands, as in the smaller shields upon the 
Monument of Edward III. 

It will be understood that the miscellaneous examples which 
I have selected to illustrate the principle and the usage of early 
Cadency, are to be regarded simply as typical specimens of their 
seyeral classes. Students will find other examples in abundance, 
many of them as characteristic and interesting as those that have 
been blazoned in this Chapter and in Chapter XV. 




Ko. 486. — Shield, from the Monument at King's Langley, to Edhond 
PLANTAOEinET, K.G.. Duke of York, borne by Henrt Plantaoknkt of Boling- 
broke, a.d. 1399 ; and, after his accession as Henbt IV., by his third son, 
John Plamtaqenet, K.G., Duke of Bedford, who died a.d. 1435. 



256 BADGES, CRESTS, SUPPORTERS, 

To which appeal, returning defiance with defiance, Warwick 
replies — 

** Now, by my father's Badge, old Neville's Crest, 
The rampant bear chained to the ragged staff—." 

The epithet " household " here most clearly refers to the 
usage of distinguishing all the followers of an eminent personage 
hy his well-known Badge ; and the words of Warwick show 
that the same device was sometimes borne both as a Crest and a 
Badge. It is to be observed that a Crest always rises from 
either a crest-coronet, an orle, or a chapeau, while the Badge is 
never accompanied with either of those accessories. Thus, the 
famous Badge of Warwick, the bear chained to a ragged staffs 
No. 206, Fl. XXX., if home as a Crest would be placed upon a 
coronet, as in No. 512 ; or, it might rest upon either a chapeau 
or an orle. I may here refer to the singularly fine Brass at 
Warwick to Thomas de Beauchamp, Earl of Warwick, who died 
A.D. 1401, in which there is a chained bear at the feet of the 
effigy of the Earl : and the ragged staff appears decorating his 
basinet, his sword-scabbard and elbow-pieces, and it is also 
charged upon a small shield upon the pommel of his sword-hilt. 
This remarkable example of early engraving has been admirably 
rendered by the Messrs. Waller in their great work on Monu- 
mental Brasses, now happily completed — a work to which I refer 
all students of Historical Heraldry. 

The Ostrich Feather Badge. See Archosclogia, XXXI., 350. 
In his will, (a.d. 1376), the Black Prince speaks of ** our Badges 
of Ostrich Feathers," " noa hagea dee plumes d^ostruce ;" and it is 
evident that these Feathers were held by the Prince in high 
esteem, and it would also seem that he regarded them in a 
peculiar light. Thus, the Prince gives directions that, on the 
occasion of his funeral, two distinct armorial compositions should 
be displayed in the procession, immediately before his remains ; 
one, for war — *' Fun pur la guerre de nos armes entiers quartelles " 



BAIXES SHIELDS OF .WLMS.&amp; ELECTORAL BOXXET OF E\XO\'ER 

Cr:AFTZR:-&gt; Ti".. XIX, XXX 




Plate LXXVI, 



KNOTS AND MOTTOES. 257 

of his quartered arms of France and England ; and the other, 
for peace — *' et Taxitre pur la paix, de nos hagea dea phimes d'adruce." 
Similar shields "for war," and "for peace" (No. 234, p. 70), 
alternate about the monument of the Prince at Canterbury. The 
well-known romantic legend which ascribes the origin of the 
famous Ostrich Feather Badge to a memorable incident at Cresci, 
(Aug. 25, 1346), requires more positive corroboration before it 
can be accepted as genuine History. I am not aware that the 
Ostrich Feathers have been in any way directly identified with 
John, King of Bohemia, who on his seal displays as his Crest 
two wings of a vulture of enormous size ; certainly, there is not 
known to exist any proof that the Black Prince himself asso- 
ciated his favourite Badge with his early exploit at Cresci. 
The first mention of this Badge that has been observed, occurs 
in the year 1370. Queen Fhilippa marked some of her plate 
with the Ostrich Feather shield. No. 234. Upon two of his 
seals, the quartered arms of the Black Prince appear between 
two Ostrich Feathers with scrolls. The same Badge was habi- 
tually used by the other Plantagenet Princes; so that, in the 
first instance, it was not held to be either a personal cognizance 
of the Black Prince, or an ensign of the Prince of Wales. John 
of Ghent bears the Ostrich Feather sometimes argent and some- 
times ermine; thus, the idea of differencing this Badge appears to 
be contemporary with its first adoption. In a remarkable boss at 
Canterbury, the feathers of Prince John have chains lying along 
iheir qu^ls. Henrt of Bolingbroke appears to have regarded the 
Ostrich Feather Badge with especial favour. In the seal which 
he used immediately before his accession, (see p. 164), his im- 
paled shield is placed between two Ostrich Feathers, each of 
which has the word Sovereigne, his favourite motto, charged 
upon a scroll entwined about it. No. 684 ; PL LXXVI. 

The Ostrich Feather with a scroll entwined about it appears 
three times repeated upon a very remarkable heraldic slab, dis- 
covered some years ago under very singular circumstances at 

s 



258 BADGES, CRESTS, 8UPF0BTEBS, 

Venicse, and whicli now is in this country. This slab, No. 684 a, 
PI. LXXIX. (the lithograph was drawn from a photograph of 
the original) was supposed, in the first instance, to be a me- 
morial of Thomas Mowbrat, Dnke of Norfolk, who died in exile 
at Venice, and under that erroneous impression it is described and 
figured in the ArchcBohgiaj xxix, 387. The slab, however, 
evidently commemorates the visit to Venice of the exiled 
Duke's great antagonist, Henry of Bolingbroke, with whom 
after his accession to the crown of England the Venetian State 
was most desirous to maintain friendly relations. Upon this 
Slab appears the craumed and chained Swan of the Bohuns, with 
the CoUar of 88, favourite ensigns of Henrt : the Royal Banner 
also without any Difference, the Boyal Crest, and the Badge of 
Henry's Earldom of Derby, ike hart lodged, complete this curious 
composition, the foreign treatment of which is so evident, par- 
ticularly in the crowned lions of the banner and the extra- 
ordinary idea of placing the helm upon the head of the swan. 
The first 8ecretum of Henry, as King, displays his quartered 
shield of France Ancient and England between two sercUed feaiherg 
hdd by lions. A seal of Thomas, Duke of Gloucester, the youngest 
son of Edward III., No. 609, PL LXX., has two large Ostrich 
Feathers similarly placed, and upon the quill of each feather is 
laid a Garter extended, the buckles being in base. The Great 
Seal of this same Prince has its field powdered with small swans 
and feathers, in lozenges, thus forming a diaper for the field of 
the seal ; No. 610, p. 38. To Thomas Mowbray, Duke of Norfolk, 
as an augmentation of high honour, Richard II. granted two 
Ostrich Feathers, to be borne erect, '* in sigillo et vexillo suo " 
— ^in both his seal and his banner. Bichard II. himself has the 
red barding of his charger sem^e of Ostrich Feathers, and an 
azure pennon similarly charged. This same Badge was adopted 
by the Beauforts; a fine example of it, the feathers having 
their quills componSe org. and az., appears in the Garter-Plate 
of John de Beaufort, E.G., first Duke of Somerset, No. 686&gt; 



TiLAPTEP XYII. Sectio&gt;il 




Pl.^^f=LX:CX N" 684- A 

HhlTIKY :.-y I ANCA^'TIK . .ti^/^rwArvLs KING HENUTIV. 
( ori^nally erecii'twl at Venire ) 



^' DufUuh/tJ tuJi /* Pf*.*»v S»Kef i^*W.'* V ^ 



KNOTS AND MOTTOES. 



259 



PL LXXVI. AU the eons of Henby IV. also bear the Ostrich 
FeatheiB as a Badge ; and it is retamed in use until, with the 
close of the Plantagenet era, it gradually assumes a distinctive 
character as the peculiar ensign of the Princes of Wales. Single 
Feathers with scrolls appear on either side of the shield in the 
singular seals of Edward Y., and Arthub Tudor, as Princes of 
Wales, (see Chap. XXIY., Section 1). Prince Edward's Feathers 
are held by two lions, No. 688, and Prince Arthur's by 
dragons, No. 689. On the obverse of the seals the field is 
diapered with feathers in lozenges, a rose being at each inter- 
section of the frette ; on the head of Prince Edward's charger is 
a single feather, but the charger of Prince Arthur has a Crest 
formed of a plume of three feathers. As one of the devices that 
diaper the robe of Anne of Bohemia, in her efiSgy, the figure of 
an ostrich is introduced. In Harl. MS., foi, 12, in the British 
Museum, it is recorded that the whUe Ostrich Feather with its pen 
golden is (hq King^s: the feather eniirefy white, or silver j is the 





No. 688. 



No. 689. 



Prince's : the feather golden, with its pen ermine, is the Duke of Lan- 
caster's : and the feaiher white, haoing its pen compony, is the Duke of 
Somerset's. It must be added, that the Ostrich Feathers fre- 
quently appear on Seals of an official or corporate character, 

s 2 



4 



261 

ises of 

_ seal of 

J* * ^ duchess 

"' J ' ^^===^ ^' * LXX., a 

»- — - »-,:;^ .^ ^ ^^^ once 

"^^^^^'^ ^ '^=*" , ..: ^ "^ "^ . «. i)andrelof 

^^^ ** '~~ .: . ' ^ ^ •' '^ , No. 511, 

»^ ^ ^ • ''!♦ f«* „/ fiddle upon 

«K. Tv^ * '''^"*'/«'rf^ are on what 

-^* •"^rfrfl'^. '*"""■*■' '" . HenkyV.. 

-- ^mi^ i. j,^ ^ J^."^ 'A. f.. , ,em. Again. 

^-*«^,taU.d«^'^?^ *'•'•''•. ...... 

""^ofPia* A-.. 




d as Badges — 
ds of the sea." 



Maubice de Beb- 
Id. 
in addition to his 
&gt;adges — ^two Faicans 
dock Badge appears 
K, K.G., A.D. 1416, at 
&lt;I a PartcuUia, in the 
in the stained glass at 
cVdmiral held by their 
;^ of the Nevilles ; and a 



^ 



•Si 



^_ sa., the tiller and stays or. ; 

\ -^"^ example at Eddington in 



f _ 



:' ^ ^ »^ given a series of English 

^ " ^ bo content to adduce only 

'*" - I'les. Mr. Planch^, in his 

I a MS. (marked 2nd M. 16) 

'^ « - ^ V d in the College of Arms, a 

"^ «»ta - the principal nobility at the 



■u 



•*i 



260 BADGES, CRB^rS, SUPPORTERS, 

which were in some way connected either directly or indirectly 
with the Crown. 

The three Ostrich Feathers, now so happily familiar to ns, 
as they are grouped together within the circlet of a princely 
coronet, and borne by our own Prikoe op Wales, do not date 
back earlier than the era of the Stuarts. In the Monument 
of Abbot Bahrtdge, at St Alban*s, three Ostrich Feathers 
appear united in a single scroll, ; and they are also represented 
precisely after the same manner in the equally splendid monu- 
ment of Prince Arthur Tudor, in Worcester Cathedral; No 
686, PI. LXXVI. Single scrolled feathers are also displayed 
upon the Worcester monument, and they give the first indication 
of their tips curling over instead of bending to the sinister. 
Arthur Tudor, Prince of Wales, the son of Henry Vin., first 
ensigned three Feathers with a Coronet, and he charged this 
group upon a roundle. Henrt Stuart, eldest son of James I., 
established the arrangement of the three feathers within a 
Prince's Coronet, in place of the scroll, as the Ensign of the 
Prince of Wales ; No. 235 a, PL XV. On a boss of the vaulting 
over the steps that lead to the noble hall of Christchurch, Ox- 
ford, the plume of three feathers ensigned with a coronet is sur- 
rounded by the Garter of the Order. 

Another renowned historical Badge is ^e Bose, tinctured either 
argent or gtdes^ or having both the metal and the colour conjoined, 
and borne sometimes alone and sometimes in association with other 
devices : (see pages 75 and 76, and PI. XIII.). In addition to the 
examples of heraldic Boses that have been already specified, I 
must particularly invite attention to the splendid Rose that 
adorns the monument of Henry YII. ; and I may also refer to a 
cluster of five Boses grouped with singular skill, that were dis- 
covered a few years ago imbedded in the wall of the ruined 
chapel of Abbot Wallingpord at St. Alban's, No. 690, PI. 
LXXVI. 

The Swan Badge of the De Bohuns appears upon the Sccretum 



KNOTS AND MOTTOES. 261 

of Thomas of Woodstock, No. 331, p. 152, between the bases of 
two shields ; and again, in a similar position, upon the seal of 
Fleshy Ck)llege, founded by the same Thomas and his Duchess 
Alianore. In another seal of this Prince, No. 509, Fl. LXX., a 
Swan appears acting as a Supporter to the shield; and, once 
more, the Swan Badge is introduced into the central spandrel of 
the Canopy of the De Bohun Brass at Westminster, No. 511, 
p. 254. Henut of Bolingbroke displays the Swan Badge upon 
his standard, No. 314, Chap. XYIII., and it also appears on what 
I may entitle his Venetian Slab, PL LXXIX. p. 268. Henby V., 
in like manner, held this same Badge in high esteem. Again, 
besides the Ostrich Feathers, the Black Prince in his Will 
speaks of several devices that he evidently used as Badges — 
these are '* Swans, Ladies' Heads, and Mermaids of the sea." 
Mermaids also are Badges of the Berkeleys (see page 68) : 
good examples are charged upon the Seal of Maurice de Ber- 
keley, where they act as Supporters to the shield. 

The well-known seal of John of Ghent, in addition to his 
achievement of arms, is charged with his Badges — ^two Falcons 
holding FeUerhcks in their beaks. The Fetterlock Badge appears 
again in the Brass to Sir Simon de Felbryge, K.6., a.d. 1416, at 
Felbrigg ; and, with a Sheaf of Arrows and a PortcuUiSj in the 
monument to Prince Arthur Tudor ; also in the stained glass at 
Canterbury. In allusion to the office of Admiral held by their 
ancestors, the Buoy of a Ship is a Badge of the Nevilles ; and a 
Badge of the Lords Zouche is a Budder sa.y the tiller and stays or. ; 
of this heraldic Rudder there is a good example at Eddington in 
Wiltshire. 

In Section 4 of Chapter XIX. I have given a series of English 
Boyal Badges ; here, therefore, I may be content to adduce only 
a small number of additional examples. Mr. Planch^, in his 
Pursuivant of Arms^ has printed from a MS. (marked 2nd M. 16) 
of the time of Edward IV., preserved in the College of Arms, a 
list of the Badges borne by some of the principal nobility at the 



262 BilDOEB, GRBSTS, SUPPORTERS, 

time this list was written. Several of the following examples 
have been selected from Mr. Flakch^*s list 

Arundel : — an acorn. 

AsTLEY : — a oinqnefoil ermine. 

Beaufort : — a portcullis, with the Motto, Altera SeeurUas, 

Brandon : — a lion's head erased gold. 

Buckingham ;-.the Stafford Knot, No. 516, PI. XXX. 

Clinton : — a golden mullet. 

CoBHAM :— a Saracen's head sable. 

Compton : — a fire-beacon. 

Dagre : — a silver escallop, attached by an intertwined cord to 
a ragged staff, No. 513, PI. XXX. 

Douglas : — a human heart gules. 

Fitz-Waryn : — a Bourchier Knot, No. 516. 

Grey of Euthyn : — a ragged staS— staff rcigtiUe $able. 

H^vstings: — a bull's head erased sable, about the neck a 
crown or. 

Howard: — a silver lion, charged on the shoulder with a 
crescent azure. 

Hungerford: — a sickle. The Hungerfords also unite their 
sickle to a garb by a cord. The Seal of Sir R de Eunqerford, 
A.D. 1445, bears, for the Crest, a garb between two sickles rising 
from a crest coronet ; there is also a sickle on each side of the 
shield. 

Mauleverer: — a white greyhound courant At AUerton 
Mauleverer in Yorkshire, the Brass (a.d. 1400) to Sir John 
Mauleverer has the arms — gu,, three greyhounds courant injpcUe 
arg.j coOared or, emblazoned upon the knight's jupon. 

Mowbray : — a mulberry tree. 

Neville : — a dun bull : also, two staples interlaced, one gold, 
the other silver; and a frette of gold. 

Norfolk : — a white lion. 

Peluam : — a buckle. 

Phrcy : — a silver crescent. 



KKOTS AND MOTTOES. 263 

Peverell : — a golden garb. 

Stanley: — a stag's head argent; also a griffin's leg erased 
or. 

Suffolk : — a golden lion queue fourch^. 

A remarkable instance of the artistio ability and of the ver- 
satile resources of the early Heralds occurs in the interior of 
Westminster Hall. The string-moulding which is carried be- 
neath the windows throughout the building, is studded along 
its entire extent with the hdm, crown and cresi of Richard II., 
alternating with his fisivourite Badge, the white harl lodged ; the 
figures are all boldly sculptured, and though all are most fftith- 
fally rendered, eveiy individual white hart (and they are eighty- 
three in number), is unlike every other, and each one has some 
distinct characteristic features of its own. It is the same with 
the lion crest and the helm, which are placed between two 
ostrich feathers having scrolls attached to their quills. 

Mr. Seton {Scottish Heraldry, p. 259), states that *' among the 
Highlanders a species of Badge has in recent times constituted a 
mark of clanship, in the shape of a leaf or sprig of a particular 
tree or shrub (usually an evergreen), which is carried in the 
bonnet or other portion of the costume — ^thus, the Badge of the 
Gordons is ivy; of the Campbelus, myrtle; of the Buchanans, 
birch ; of the Camebons, oak ; of the Grahams, laurel ; of the 
MuBRATS, juniper; of the Sobertsons, fern or brachen; of the 
Magdonalds, bell-heath ; and of the Maooregors, lime." 



264 



BADGES, CRESTS, SUPPORTERS, 



SECTION III. 

CRESTS. 




No. 523. Achievement of Arms of Humphbey Stafford, K.G., Earl 
Stafford, a.d. 1460. From his Qarter-Plate at Windsor. 

A Crest is a figure or device which originally was actually 
worn upon a Basinet and a Helm, and now is represented above 
a Shield of Arms. From an early period in the era of true 
English Heraldry, the Crest was held to be an ensign of great 
dignity and honour. In the first instance, the Crest was usually 
some figure or device that was also borne in the Arms ; but, in 
process of time, Crests were more generally altogether distinct 
from the Charges of the Shields, though it was common for them 
to assimilate to the Supporters. The Crest was worn supported 



KNOTS AND MOTTOES. 265 

by a Cliapeaii or a Wreath, or sometimes it rose above a Coronet 
It also became a usage in the fifteenth century to have the 
Crest rise from out of a Coronet, which was simply a decoration 
to the helm, and supplied the place of the more prevalent 
Wreath. This Crest-Ooronet^ No. 257 a, probably derived from 




Crest-Ooronet.— No. 257 a. 

such a coronet-like enrichment of helms as appears in the ef&amp;gy 
of Sir Hugh Calvely at Bunbury, No. 257, is still retained in 
modem Heraldry. It is commonly blazoned as a Ducal-Coranet : 
it has no reference, however, to ducal or to any other rank, and it 
might with greater propriety be distinguished as simply a Crest- 
Coronet, In form it bears a close resemblance to the crowns of 
Henry in., (No. 198, p. 61), and Alianore of Castile. The 
basinet of Sir Hugh Calvely affords a rich example of the Orle 
or Wreath, No. 257, PL XVI. : but this accessory was more gene- 
rally worn projecting from the helm, as in the efiSgy of Ealph 
Neville, ' Earl of Westmoreland, at Staindrop, No. 258. See 
Wreath, p. 133. 

The Wbeath (see Wreath in Chap. XIII.), is now represented 
having six folds, three of the principal metal and three of the 
principal colour of the arms: and in the case of a quartered 
shield the tinctures of the Wreath are those of the first quarter. 
This Crest-Wreath first appears a little before the middle of the 
14th century : the Brass to Sir John Habsyck, No. 301 (a.d. 
1384), gives a good early example ; and other still earlier ex- 
amples occur in the seals of Sir John Willoughby (1340), Sir 
Thomas Erseine (1364), and Sir Alexander and Sir David 
Lindsay (1371, 1389). The EflSgy of Sir Humphrey Stafford at 
Bromsgrove, Worcestershire, has been noticed as displaying 



266 BADGES, CRESTS, SUPPORTERS, 

another early example of the Crest-Wreath ; thLa is an error, 
however, the date of that efiSgy being abont 1450, and not 
about 1350. 

Crests are not borne in the armorial Insignia of ladies, what- 
ever may be their rank or condition, with the sole exception of 
the Sovereign. It has long been the custom for Crests to be 
assigned to Corporate Bodies, but such an usage must be held to 
be totally at variance with true heraldic feeling. 

In his second Great Seal, a.d. 1194, Hichard I. wears a fan- 
like decoration surmounting his helm, having beneath it a lion. 
No. 259, PL XXYI. In many instances the helms of the thir- 
teenth century have similar Crests, variously adorned. Hum- 
PHRET D£ BoHUN, fourth Earl of Hereford, bears the fim-like 
device both on his own helm and on the head of his charger. 
No. 260; Henry de Lacy, Earl of Lincoln (a.d. 1272-1312) does 
the same ; and, as late as about 1345, Sir Geoffrey Louterell's 
Crest retains its fan-like contour, but it is charged with his arms, 
as in No. 261, PI. XXVL Edward IIL upon his Great Seal for 
the first time bears a true heraldic Crest — ^the Oraumed Lion of 
England, standing upon a chapeau. No. 262. This Sovereign 
sometimes also bears an Eagle on his crest : but from this timo 
the crowned lion has continued to be the Crest of England, It is 
to be observed, that the marks of Royal Cadency were displayed 
as weU upon Crests as upon shields. The Boyal Lion, for ex- 
ample, stands upon the helm of the Black Prince gorged with 
his silver label, No. 263, PI. XXVI. In like manner, Labels 
and other Marks of Cadency appear upon the Crests of personages 
of noble and knightly rank. Thus, the lion-crests of John Plan- 
tagenet, K.G., Duke of Bedford, of George Plantagenet, K.G., 
Duke of Clarence, and of John Mowbray, K.G., Duke of Norfolk 
(a.d. 1435, 1477 and 1475), as blazoned in their stall-plates, are 
gorged with labels, the first having three, and the latter two five 
points; Nos. 520 and 521, Pis. XXX. and XLL These labels 
appear to be worn by the lions after the manner of bands or 



CRESTS. 



I'AFrFr; XV 




&gt;:xv 



KNOTS AND MOTTOES. 267 

frills. In No. 451, PI. XLI., the lion-crest of Thomas de Beau- 
FOBT, K.G., Eaxl of Dorset, appears gorged with a coUar comr 
panee org, and az. 

In some few instances the devices assumed and worn as Crests, 
are identical with those that appear in the shields of arms of the 
wearers ; but the prevailing usage was to assume for the Crest a 
figure alt(^ether different from the charges of the shield ; and 
uncommonly strange, indeed, must have been the appearance of 
the figures that were frequently thus displayed by the early 
knights upon their helms. A Panache, or upright plume formed 
of a large number of feathers, generally the feathers of the cock 
or swan, was a favourite Crest. This is the Crest of the De 
Mobtdcebs, and it is admirably blazoned on their seals. The 
effigies of Sir Bichabd Pembbidge, K.G., at Hereford, Sir Sobebt 
DE Mabmion, at Tanfield, and of Sir Thomas Abdebne, at Elford, 
all of them about a.d. 1400, are good examples. The panache of 
Sir Edmund de Thorpe, a.d. 1418, at Afihwelthorpe, is formed of 
peacock's feathers. No. 264, p. 110 ; and such is also the panache 
of Lord Febbebs of Chartley, a.d. 1425, at Merevale, No. 267 a, 
PL XXVI. The Garter-plates of Sir Thomas Ebpingham, K.G., 
of Sir William Philip, K.G., of Sir Symon de Felbbyge, K.G., of 
Sir Thomas Felton, K.G., and John, Lord Scbope, K.G. (No- 
522, Chap. XXY.,) all of the fifteenth century, display panache- 
crests. 

The Oontotte, a " lady's fevour " or " token," No. 256, PI. XV., 
is worn with the Crest until about the middle of the fourteenth 
century, after which time this accessory disappears, and the 
Crest is placed upon its Wreath (probably derived by the Cru- 
saders from the turbans of the Saracens) Coronet or Chapeau 
rising above the Mantling. Thomas, Earl of Lancasteb, a.d. 
1322, on his seal appears having a dragon with a contoise upon 
his helm, and a similar monster is upon the head of his charger, 
No. 524, PL XXXV. : and the seal of Balph de Monthebmeb, 
Earl of Gloucesteb, a.d. 1323, has on his helm an eagle-crest 



268 



BADGES, CRESTS, SXJPPORTERS, 



and a oontoise. This eagle-crest was a special grant from 
Edward III. to Wiluam de MoNTACirrE. In Achievements of 
Arms, and particularly in such as are blazoned on Seals, the 
group is arranged in the manner represented in No. 301, PI. I., 
the Supporters being added on either side as in No. 707 a. The 
Crests in these compositions of the fourteenth and fifteenth 
centuries are ahnost invariably very large in proportion to the 
Shields ; and the same remark is equally applicable to the Crests 
that are blazoned in the Windsor Garter-Plates. Thus, in 
No. 523, p. 264, the Stoan's head and wings borne by Hum- 
phrey, Earl of Stafford, K.G., are of truly imposing propor- 
tions : and of the same usage in Seals No. 707 a, the Seal of 
Bichard, Earl of Arundel, a.d. 1330-1375, is an excellent early 
example. 




No. 707 A.— Seal of Bichard, Earl of Abundel. 

Another good example from the Gtki*ter-Plates I have already 
given in No. 626, PI. LXVI. : this commanding Crest forms a 



KNOTS AND MOTTOFS. 269 

part of the Achievement of the maternal ancestor of the Earl of 
Stafford, Humphrey de Bohun, last Earl of Hereford. 

In military monumental effigies, the helm of the deceased 
warrior very generally forms his becoming pillow ; and npon 
the helm so placed the Crest is constantly represented, with 
the orle or the coronet and the mantling. I may specify, as 
additional exan^ples, the sculptured memorials of Ralph de 
Neville, Earl of Westmoreland, at Staindrop, a.d. 1420; of 
Richard Beauchamp, E.G., Earl of Warwick, a.d, 1439, at 
Warwick ; the Crest, No. 265, PL XLI., a swan'a hecid and neck, 
is again represented in the Garter-Plate ; of the De la Poles, at 
Wingfield ; and of Sir Humphrey Stafford, at Bromi^rove : also 
the Brasses to Lord Stourton, a.d. 1404, at Sawtry, Hunts, (the 
Crest is a demi-monk grcLsping a scourge of knotted cords). No, 266, 
PI. XXVI. ; of Lord Willloi de Bryenne, Seal, Kent, No. 267, 
PL XXVI., (the Garter-Plate of Sir Guy de Bryenne, E.G. 
A.D. 1370, bears the same Crest — a hunting-horn upon a chapeau) ; 
and of Sir John de Brewys, a.d. 1426, at Wiston, in Sussex : 
Lord Stourton's demi-monk, derived from the family of Moyne, is 
a canting Crest The Crest of Beckford is another most cha- 
racteristic example of the same nsage, — it is a heron's head erased 
or, gorged with a eoUarfleurie gu., in Uie beak a fish org. ; the Bebns 
here is twofold, both the strong sharp beak — bee fori of the fisher 
bird, and the allnsion conveyed by the captured fish to the ford 
of the heck or stream from whence the heron may be supposed to 
have secured his prey : this Crest is most beautifully engraved 
in the " Heraldry of Fish/' p. 98. 

The helm of Sir Edmund de Thorpe, No. 264, p. 110, and that 
of Kalph, Lord Basbett, K.G., No. 612, PI. XLV. (from his 
Garter-Plate), may be regarded as models for heraldic helms; 
and with them may be associated No. 611, PL XLV., from the 
monument to the Black Prince. Another fine example of the 
Crest-Coi-onet occurs in the Brass to Sir Thomas Bromfletf., 
A.D. 1430, at Wimington, No. 268, PI. XXVI., but the Crest 



270 



BADGES, CRESTS, SUPPORTERS, 



itself is lost: and equally fine examples are blazoned in the 
Garter-Plates of Sir Hugh de Courtenay, Lord "Willoughby, and 
Sir Thomas Felton, amongst the earliest of the existing series at 
Windsor. In his Brass at Harpham, a.d. 1420, Sir Thomas de 





No. 691.— Crest : Sir T. de Saint 
QunrriN. 



No. 692.— Crest- Wreath : Lord 
Willoughby D'Ebesby. 



Saint Quintin is represented with a singular modification of the 
panache upon his basinet, No. 691; and in another Brass at 
Spilsby, a knight, probably Willlam, Lord Willoughby 
D'Eresby, a,d. 1409, has his basinet encircled with an orle of 
roses, No. 692. 

The Garter-Plate of John, Lord Lysle, K.G. (one of the 
Knights Founders of the Order), furnishes a striking example 
of the extraordinary Crests that were worn even by men of most 
eminent distinction. Besting immediately upon his basinet, the 
Crest of Lord Lysle is a miU'Stone arg,, pecked «a., ihe inner circle 
and ike rim of the second, the fer-de-mdine or, No. 693, PL LXIV. 
The Crest of the Bourchiers appears in several of the Garter- 
Plates, with some slight modifications for Difference : it is a 
Saracen's head in profile ppr.^ bearded so., wearing a tall cap gu., 
which bends towards the deoster, and is tasseUed or. This cap, in the 
Garter-Plate of Henry Bourchibr, Earl of Essex, rises from a 
crest-coronet which is interposed between the head and the cap 
itself: this coronet is golden, and has on its circlet three waier- 
bougets sa. In the remarkable monument of Ludovic Bobesart, 



COROliETS, MANTLINGS, &amp;. CRESTS. 

?:-:AFT£r-s xy x.yii. :■:::■; 




/ 



KNOTS AND MOTTOES. 271 

K.G., Lord Bourchier, Standard-Bearer to Henby V., the cap or 
bonnet of the SaracenVhead Crest is surmounted by a Catherine- 
wkedy derived from the arms of the Eoets, with whom he was 
connected ; this, accordingly, is an example of Marshalling in a 
Crest. The Crest of Sir John Daubygn^, a mvUei surrounded by 
hoUy 'leaves, has been already blazoned; (see pages 47 and 134, 
and No. 408) ; another curious crest of a somewhat similar cha- 
racter, borne by John de Wydevil, — appears on his monument 
at Grafton Begis, Northants ; it is a bird sitting on a tuft of oak- 
leaves^ a scroll (now without any legend) issuing from its beak. 

Seals abotind in admirable examples of Crests, and they 
illustrate many curious modifications of medissval heraldic usage. 
Thus, the Crest of the Mortimers, a lofty panache of many azure 
feathers rising from out of a crest-coronet. No. 269, PL XXVI., is 
represented in various seals of members of the House of March : 
but Edmund Mortimer, a.d. 1372, has a seal charged with his 
paternal shield, suspended by its guige from a rose-tree, and 
having the inescutcheon diapered; and, in place of the helm 
and crest above the shield, on either side of the shield placed as 
a supporter is one of the white lions of the Earls of March helmed, 
the two helms almost enclosing the lions, and having mantling, 
coronet, and crest, and respecting each other ; No. 270, Chap. 




No. 270 A.— Seal of Edmund De Abundel. 

XXIV. Another seal, that of Edmund de Abctndel, who was 
Earl from 1301 till 1326, has two crested helms similarly placed, 
but without any animals as supporters, No. 270 a. The 



272 BADGES, CRESTS, SUPPORTERS, 

Crest of Delabere, of Gloucestershire, is another interesting 
example of what originally was doubtless a panache : this Crest, 
now borne as a phme of five ostrich feathers per pale arg., and az,, 
issuing from a crest-coronety is said to have been given to Sir 
KicHARD DE LA Bere by the Black Prince in acknowledgment of 
signal service rendered to him at Cresci. Panache or Plume 
Crests sometimes are differenced ; as by the Tyndalls, with either 
a martlet or an ermine circlet, No. 267 b. It appears to have 





No. 267 B. — Crests of Ttndaix. 

been a favourite custom to place the head and neck of a bird or 
of any imaginary winged creature between two lofty groups of 
upright feathers, and thus to form a Crest; the Seals of the 
Earls of Arundel provide good examples of this singular usage, . 
as in No. 694, PI. LXIV., the Crest of Richard Fttz Alan, a.d. 
1390. In No. 199 A, p. 62, an ermine, the Crest of Lord Dynham, 
E.G., stands between two tall spikes that issue from the Cap of 
Estate. 

Crests are now generally represented resting upon a wreath ; 
but the crest-coronet and also the chapeau are still retained in 
modem blazon : for example, the Crest of the Duke of Rutland 
is on a chapeau gu., lined erm., a peacock in its pride, proper. The 
Duke of Newcastle bears the same crest upon a wreath, Walter 
Long, of Preshaw House, Hants, Esquire, bears as his Crest, out 
of a crest-coronet or, a demi-lion rampt, org. 

Crests, like shields of arms, being held to be hereditary, it 
necessarily follows that the same person may inherit and may 



KNOTS AND MOTTOES. 273 

rightly bear two or more eresU, as he may quarter two or more 
than two coats of arms : for example, the Earl Fitzwilliam bears 
these two crests ; — 1st, out of a cresUcoronet or^ a plume of three 
ogtrieh fecUhers org.; and 2nd, on a wreath or and «a., a griffin 
pa$9antppr. It must be added, that in this country the strict 
rule is that only one Crest can be borne, except under the follow- 
ing conditions : — 1st, By a special grant from the Crown, as an 
augmentation; such are the Crests of Welleslet, Hardinqe, 
Cameron, Bart. : or, 2ndly, When any person may have obtained 
the Boyal licence to bear and use the name and arms of another 
family in addition to his own, in any such case the Crests of both 
&amp;milies are displayed above the quartered arms ; the Crests of 
the Dukes of Buckingham, Leeds, Richmond, and Sutherland, the 
Marquess of Lansdowne, of Dalrtmple-Hay, Bart., are examples. 

For further illustration, I add a few other examples of Crests. 

Perct, Duke of Northumberland : — On a chapeau^ a lion statant, 
his tail extended or. In No. 185, p. 55, this lion is represented 
without the chapeau. 

Howard, representative of Mowbray, Duke of Norfolk : — On 
a chapeau, a lion statant guardant, his taU extended or, and ducaUy 
gorged org. This lion of the Howards is represented in No. 186, 
p. 55, without either the chapeau or the coronet. It was 
originally granted by Hichard II. to Thomas Mowbray, Earl 
Marshal. 

Fitz-Alan, Earl of Arundel : — Out of a crest-coronet or, a griffin's 
head org., beaked gu,, between a pair of wings erect; No. 694, 
PI. LXIV. 

Neville, Earl of Westmoreland: — From a wreath^ a dun huWs 
head and neck erased ppr. (Monument and Seals.) 

Ealph, Lord Bassett, of Drayton, K.G. :— Oirf of of a cregt- 
coronet, a boar's head erased sa., armed or. (Garter-Plate.) 

Stanley, Earl of Derby : — On a chapeau, an eagle, wings ad- 
dorsed or, hovering over an infant in its nest ppr., swaddled az., banded 
of the first. (Garter-Plate.) 



274 BADGES, CRESTS, SUPPORTERS, 

The Stanleys have derived this Crest from the Lathams, of 
whom it is recorded that one of the heads of their house adopted 
as his heir a child which had been exposed in an eagle's nest in 
Latham Park, but which the eagle had carefully nurtured, instead 
of destroying it. 

KiRKPATRiCK, of Closebum : — On a wrecUh^ a dexter handy couped 
cA the wristf holding erect a dagger imbrued, aH ppr,, with the motto, 
" Tse mak inker:' No. 525 a, PI. XXX. 

The historical origin of this Crest and its Motto is well known. 

Pole, Sir Kichard, K.G., &amp;ther of the Cardinal : — On a wreathy 
a cormorant trussing a fish, aUppr. (Garter-Plate.) 

WoDEHOUSE, Baron Wodehouse: — On a wreath, a deader hand 
holding a dub, aU jppr. In chief, the words, " Frappez fortj* In 
bsfie, the word " Agincourt" 

Pelham-Clinton, Duke of Newcastle : For Cunton : — Out of a 
crest'Coronety a plume of five ostrich feathers org., banded with a line 
set chenran-mse ax. For Pelham i—On a wreath, a peacock in its 
pride ppr. 

An early crest of the Pelham s was a lantern, 

Drake : — Ot&lt;2 of a wreath, a ship, drawn round a glebe with a 
cable-rope by a hand issuing out of clouds, aU ppr. ; in chief, the 
motto, Bimno Auxilio, No. 144 b, PI. XXVI. 

Hope : — Out of a wreath, a broken globe, surmounted by a rainbow 
issuing out of a cloud at each end, all ppr. No. 144 A, PL XXYI. 

Wellesley, Duke of Wellington : — Out of a ducal coronet or, a 
demi'lion rampt, gu,, holding a swaUow-tailed pennon of the lastj 
the fly to the sinister, a/nd ai the head charged with the ensign of 
8t, George. 

Douglas Hamilton, Duke of Hamilton i^OuJt of a crest-coronet^ 
an oakrtree fructed, penetrated transversely in the main stem by a 
frame-saw, aUppr,, the saw-firame or. 

The old Earls of Dunbar and March, who were hereditary 
Wardens of the Marches of the Scottish border, bore for a Crest 
a horse's head bridled ; and the Marquess of Annandale, also a 



KNOTS AND MOTTOEB. 275 

Lord Marcher, liad for his Crest a spur erect, between a pair of 
wings, both Crests being designed to intimate prompt readiness 
and speed in pnrauit 

Crests may be considered to have been occasionally adopted 
with a view to a species of Marshalling. 

SECTION III. 

9UFF0BTEB8. 

Supporters are figures, whether of human or imaginary creatures, 
or of living creatures of whatever kind which, as a general rule, 
stand on either side of a shield, as if in the act of holding it up 
(supporting it), or guarding it Supporters, accordingly, in the 
great majority of instances, and more particularly in the Heraldry 
of England, appear in pairs, one on the Dexter and the other on 
the Sinister of the shield. The usage prevalent in early times, 
with occasional exceptions, was that the two Supporters should 
be alike ; but in modem English Heraldry they very frequently 
are altc^ether distinct &amp;om one another, as in the instance of the 
Boycd Supporters of England, the Lion and the Unicom. French 
Heralds distinguish Human Figures, when they appear supporting 
any Shield, by the title of " Tenants," while all Animals dis- 
charging a similar duty are styled " Supporters." 

Single Supporters, which are by no means uncommon in Con- 
tinental Heraldry, occasionally appear in the early Seals of both 
England and Scotland ; and in our own times some few relics of 
this original practice still survive ; thus, the Lord of the Manor 
of Stoke-Lyne, in Oxfordshire, charges his paternal Shield upon 
the breast of a hawk, by virtue of a special grant of Charles I. 

I have given examples of early English Single Supporters in 
No. 201, PI. XX.; No. 212 c, PI. LXII.; and Nos. 509, 625, 
PI. LXX. : and in his Scottish Heraldry (pp. 260-272), Mr. Seton 
has shown what Scottish Seals exemplify this usage in the most 
characteristic manner ; and to some of these I presently shall 
more particularly refer. 

T 2 



276 BADGES, CRi&amp;TS, StJPFORTEBS, 

These honourable accessories of the Heraldic Shield are said 
to have been introduced, (like Quartering), by Edward III., but 
they are of uncertain authority until the reign of Henry VI. 
Supporters are now borne, by right, by all the Peers of the 
Realm, by Knights of the Garter, and Knights Grand Crosses of 
the Bath, also by the Nova Scotia Baronets, and the Chiefs of the 
Scottish Clans ; and they are conceded to those Sons of Peers 
who bear honorary titles of Nobility. Supporters are not granted 
in England without the express command of the Sovereign ; but 
in Scotland " Lord Lion " enjoys this privilege. Supporters are 
not borne by any Spiritual Peers. They appear associated with 
the Arms of many persons of various ranks, who have derived 
them from some distinguished ancestors. The actual origin of 
Supporters has been a subject of much speculation with writers 
on Heraldry. I am disposed to consider that they may be de- 
rived in part from a desire to combine personal Badges with 
hereditary heraldic compositions, while in part Supporters may 
have resulted from certain early forms of Teither Marshalling or 
Differencing. It is highly probable, also, that the introduction 
of these accessories of Shields of Arms may have been greatly 
influenced by the grotesque lizards and other figures in such 
favour with illuminators, and which, with various animals, the 
early seal-engravers commonly introduced as ornaments — " not, 
however," as Mr. Planch:6 judiciously remarks, " without some 
heraldic intention." And again, the early habit of grouping two 
or more Shields with an Effigy, and more particularly the group- 
ing together a single Shield and Effigy, or the suspending a 
Shield from a tree upon a seal, might lead by an easy transition 
to the adoption, firsts of a single figure, and afterwards of two 
figures to sujiport a Shield, 

Animals, either the same i^ appear in the blazon of the 
shields which they "support," or obtained from some allied 
coat of arms, together with personal and fitmily Badges, are 
common on Seals long before the regular appearance of true 



KKOTS AND MOITOEB. 277 

Supporters, under the conditions that they still continne to 
assume ; and henoe, from the introduction of these figures on 
each side of shields of arms upon seals may be directly derived 
the two figures, that in the fifteenth century become regular 
accessories of the heraldic Achievements of Boyal and noble 
personages. From their first appearance, Supporters, like 
Crests, have been charged with Marks of Cadency. 

The figures of animals that were introduced into their com- 
positions, and charged by the early heraldic seal-engravers with 
the duty of Supporters, are placed in various positions, but they 
always lead more or less directly to the idea of the true Sup- 
porter, that afterwards was accepted with common consent. 
The earliest indication of the use of an heraldic Supporter to 
which I am able to refer, occurs in- the seal of Bichard, second 
Earl of Cornwall, about a.d. 1290, (No. 212 c, PL LXIL), in 
which an imperial eagle holds in his beak the guige of the 
shield. The seal of Humphrey de Bouun, a.d. 1322, (No. 201, 
PL XX.), is a second most interesting example of the early seal- 
engraver's feeling in the matter of a Supporter. The guige, or 
shield-belt, instead of being passed over a boss or some other 
architectuiral detail, in this shield is carried by the suxm, that was 
the Badge of the Earls of Hereford. Another seal, (No. 502, PL 
LXX.), exhibits the De Bohun Swan in the same position above 
the shield ; but here the guige is omitted, and in its stead the 
chain that leads from the collar of the bird is fastened to the 
chief of the shield; this is one of the seals of Thomas Plan- 
tagenet, Buke of Gloucester, the youngest son of Edward 
III., who married the elder of the two co-heiresses of the 
last Earl of Hereford. The impression of this seal from which 
the wood-cut has been drawn, is attached to a deed bearing the 
date 1395. The seal of Thomas Holland, Earl of Kent, half- 
brother of Bichard II., of a rather earlier date, represents the 
shield of arms of the Earl — England^ toUhin a hardure org,, 
having the guige buckled round the neck of a white hind lodged^ 



278 BADGES, CRESTS, SUPPORTERS, 

(No. 525, PL LXX.), an animal closely allied to the white harl 
which was King Richard's own favourite Badge. This singalarly 
beautiful seal carries out the idea of a Supporter in a most 
agreeable manner. The seal of Edmund de Mortimer (seep. 271, 
and No. 270), is another example that is equally curious, charac- 
teristic, and interesting. The Falcons of John of Ghent, the 
Ostrich Feathers of his son, the Angels that are grouped around 
the Shield of Richard II. at Westminster Hall, the Mermaids 
of the Berkeleys, with the quaint lizards of the early seal- 
engravers, all take a part in preparing the way for Supporters. 
The seal of Henrt, first Duke of Lancaster, about a.d. 1350, has 
the shield placed between two Itona Befant guardant, addorsed, and 
above there is the demi-figure of an Angel with expanded wings. 
An Angel, again, is represented with singularly impressive effect, 
supporting the shield on the beautiful seal of Mary of Gueldres, 
Queen of James II. of Scotland, (a.d. 1459.) The seals of two of 
the Fitz- Alans, Earls of Arundel, severally a.d. 1375 and 1397, 
have as Supporters, the former two lions, and the latter two 
grifBns ; and these animals regularly support — ^that is, they hold up 
the crested helma above the shield. No. 707 a, p. 271, and Na 707, 
Chap. XXIY. This series of progressive examples might easily be 
caiTied on, until it would merge into the illustration of the sys- 
tematic use of true Supporters in the middle of the fifteenth cen- 
tury. The seals of George Plantagenet, Duke of Clarence, of 
Edmund de Mortimer, Earl of March, and of the accomplished 
and unfortunate John Tiptoft, Earl of Worcester, all about a.ix 
1470, form a small group of admirable examples of Achievements 
of Arms having Supporters. 

The seal of Joh'es D'ns de Segrave — ^the Segrave of Caerla- 
verock — has his shield charged with a lion rampt. crowned, and on 
either side of the shield is a garb : thus a Badge is introduced into 
this composition in such a manner as to render it a prototype of 
Supporters. In the next century, Richard de Beauchamp (died 
in 1439) has his quartered shield of BeoMchamp and Neuburgh 



KNOTS AND MOTTOES. 279 

(No&amp; 367 and 368) supported by his famous Badges, two chained 
hears toUh ragged staves. At the close of this fifteenth century, the 
monumental chantry of Abbot Bamrtge at St. Alban*s abounds in 
admirable examples of Supporters, a truly characteristic speci- 
men of which I have engraved in No. 623, PI. LXXVII. : See 
Bdnts in Chap. XIII. and see also Chap. XXX. I may here 
refer to the singular inanimate canting Supjforters which appear 
upon the Seal of William, Lord Bottreaux (a.d. 1426); the 
Shield couch^e, charged with a Griffin segreant and surmounted 
by a helm and crest, is supported on either side by an architectural 
buttress^ in evident allusion to the noble bearer's name. 

In Scottish Heraldry, Supporters, originally entitled " Bearers," 
appear at about the same period as may be assigned to their ap- 
pearance in England ; and they were developed for the most 
part under the same conditions, the almost only marked distinc- 
tion being a comparatively more frequent use of a single Sup- 
porter in the earliest examples. Thus, on several Scottish seals 
of the close of the thirteenth century, the shield of arms is dis- 
played upon the breast of an eagle ; as on the seal of Alexander 
Stuart, Earl of Menteith, a.d. 1296. David Lindsay, Earl of 
Crawford, a.d. 1345, has a similar seal; and in 1366, and 1394, 
the seals of Margaret Stuart, Countess of Angus, and of Euphe- 
MiA Leslie, Countess of Boss, display three shields charged upon 
the breast and wings of an eagle displayed. Many other varieties of 
single Supporters were in use at the same period. A second seal 
of the Earl of Crawford, which is considered to bear the earliest 
known Scottish Crest — a swan's head and neck issuing from between 
two taU wings, rising erect from a crest-coronet— also appears to fur- 
nish the earliest example of regular Supporters, tu&gt;o lions ; the 
shield itself bears two coats quarterly. Two griffins are the 
Supporters on the seal that takes rank as second in chronological 
succession — that of Sir Thomas Erskine, a.d. 1364. Upon the 
seal of \Vm. Buihvex, a.d. 1396, a tree growing up from a mount 
appears on each side of the shield. Savage men frequently act as 



280 BADGES, CRESTS, SUPPORTERS^ 

SupportetB of Scottish shields, as do animals taken from the charges 
of the shields themselves; and various hnman and allegorical 
figures discharge similar duties. A few Scottish Supporters are 
allusive after such a fisushion as thm—ttoo Conies for Cunninghaic, 
Earl of Glencairn, and for Lord Oliphant ttoo dephawU. The 
Secretum of Eling James I., a.d. 1429, is the earliest example of 
Supporters grouped* with a Royal Scottish shield ; these Sup- 
porters are two Uons^ the umccmj which now is held to he em- 
phatically the Boyal Supporter of Scotland, not appearing, ex- 
cept in the coinage, hefore the time of Mary Stuart. 

In Chapter XIX., Section 3, I have descrihed the changes 
that have taken place in the Boyal Supporters of England ; this 
section of this present Chapter I conclude with a few examples, 
which will show of what character are the various figures 
that are still in use as Supporters to the Arms of British Peers. 

Somerset, Duke of Bkaufort : — Dexter ; A panther arg., spoUed 
of various colours, fire issuant from his mouth and ears ppr,, gorged 
with a plain collar ^ and chained or : Sinister ; a wyvem, wings 
addorsed, vert, holding in the mouth a sinister hand couped at the 
wrist gu, 

Graham, Duke of Montrose:— Ttoo storks arg., beaked and 
membered gu, 

Campbell, Duke of Argyll : — Two lions rampt guard gu, 

Wellesley, Duke of Wellington : — Two lions gu., each gorged 
unth an Eastern crown, and chained or, 

Chandos Grenville Nugent Temple, Duke of Buckingham : — 
Dexter; a lion per fesse embaUled or andgu,: Sinister; a horse 
org., semee of eaglets sa, 

Stafford Jermingham, Baron Stafford : — Dexter ; a lien rampt, 
or : Sinister ; a swan (from the De Bohuns) org., beaked and legged 
sa., ducaUy gorged per pale gu, and of the second, 

Neville, Earl of Abergavenny : — Two buUs arg.,pied sa., armed, 
unguled, coUared oticl chained, and at the ends of the chains two 
staples or. 



KNOTS AND MOTTOES. 281 

Gascoyne Cecil, Marquess of Salisbury : — Ttoo lions erm. The 
same Supporters are also borne by the Marquess of Exeter. 

Stanley, Earl of Derby : — Dexter ; a griffin : Sinister ; a hart ; 
boih or^ and ducally gorged and chained az., the hart aUired of the lagt. 

Courtenay, Earl of Devon ; — Two hoara org., hrisUedj tuakedj 
and vngvled or. 

Cavendish, Duke of Devonshire : — Tioo stags ppr., attired or, 
each gorged m(h a garland of roses org, and az,, barbed vert, 

Gordon Lennox, Duke of Richmond : — Dexter ; an unicorn arg,, 
armed, maned, and ungtded or: Sinister; an antelope org., armed 
and hoofed or, each Supporter gorged with a collar componee org. 
and gu. 

St. Maur, Duke of Somerset : — ^Dexter ; an unicorn arg,, armed^ 
maned and tufted or, gorged with a ducal collar per pale az. and gold^ 
to which is affixed a chain of the last : Sinister ; a buU az,, ducally 
gorged, chained, armed and hoofed or. 

Spencer, Earl Spencer : — Dexter ; a griffin per fesse erm. and 
erminoiSy gorged with a coUar having its edges fleurie counter-fleurie 
8(L, charged with three escaUops org., aad chained of the third: 
Sinister ; a wyvem, erect on his tail, erm., collared and chained as 
the griffin. 

Granville Leveson Gower, Duke of Sutherland: — Dexter; 
a wolf arg., collared and lined or : Sinister ; a savage man, wreathed 
about the temples and the waist unth laurel, holding in his dexter hand 
a club, resting on his shoulder, all ppr., and with his sinister hand 
supporting an ancient shield of Sutherland,— that is, gu., three 
mullets or, within a bordure gold, charged wUh a tressure of Scotland. 

SECTION IV. 

MOTTOEB. 

The Motto, or Mot — ^the brief significant saj'ing of a family, 
which in battle would be their war-cry, appears to have been 
habitually associated by the &lt;&gt;arly Heralds with the Badge, and 
also sometimes with the Crest of its owner. 



284 BADGES, CRESTS, SUPPORTERS, 

Providence my light. The Crest, a military tent, and mullets 

borne on the shield.) 

Spring Eice, Baron Monteagle :—AUe fert aquila. (The eagle 

soars aloft. Two eagles are the Supporters.) 
Cavendish :-^Cavendo hOus. (Safe through Caution.) 
Home i—Vise h la fin, (Look to the end— to Home.) 

SECTION V. 



Amongst the devices that were used as Badges in early 
Heraldry, certain intertwined cords, distinguished by the title 
of Knots, may be considered to form a small distinct class of 
heraldic figures. 

A Knot, probably designed to convey the idea of a Mono- 
gram, appears amongst the various devices with which the robe 
of Anne of Bohemia in her efiQgy at Westminster is diapered : it 
is represented in No. 514, PI. XXX. 

The following are the other varieties of Knots that occur in 
blazon : — 

The Stafford Knot:— No. 616, PI. XXX. 

ThE BouRCHiER Knot :— No. 616 ; also No. 696, p. 285. 

The Heneaqe Knot: — No. 617. 

The Wake and Ormond Knot: — ^No. 618, (formed from the 
initials W and intertwined). 

The BowEN Knot: — No. 619, (formed of four bows). 

The Lacy Knot, which is a rather intricate but an elegant 
itUerlaced cord, that thus forms a Bebus of the name, Lacy, 

Knots sometimes form Badges in combination with other 
devices: thus, the Badge of the Dacres is formed by a card 
etUunned about an eacallop-aheU and a ragged staff. No. 513, PL 
XXXIX : in this manner, a compound Badge may significantly 
indicate the union of two families. Another example is the 
Badge of Edward, Lord Hastings, which is produced by a similar 
process for tying together a ndde and a garb. 



CRESTS. KXOTS, &amp;? 











KNOTS AND MOTTOES. 



285 



The Stafford Knot is repeated again and again, in association 
with no less than eighteen Badges of the House of Stafford 
(which descends by no less than ten different marriages from the 
Royal Blood of both England and France,) npon the curious 
marble mural slab in the Chapel of St Edmund in Westminster 
Abbey — the memorial of John Paul Howard, Earl of Stafford, 
who died in the year 1762. 

The Baurchier Knot I have shown (p. 115,) to have been used 
to decorate the mantlings of one nobleman of the Bourchier 
fJEunily; upon the monument of another Bourchier at West- 
minster, this same Knot is several times repeated, engraved in 
brass, and attached to a coudi^e — ^the piece of armour that was 
used to protect the elbow joint, in the panoply of the second half 
of the thirteenth century. No. 695. 




No. 695. — ^Bonrohier-Knot and Oondi^re, or Elbow-guard: Brass in St. 
Edmund's Chapel, Westminster Abbey, to Sir Humphret Boubchieb, killed 
at Bomet ajx 1471. 




No. 314. — Standard of Henbt Plantaoenet, of Bolingbroke. 



CHAPTER XVIIL 



FLAGS. 



From a very early period Heraldic Devices have been embla- 
zoned upon Flags of various kinds ; and similar Devices have 
also been frequently used without any Flag properly so called, to 
discharge the duty of military and official standards. 

Symbolical Figures we know to have formed the Standards 
of the Egyptians and Assyrians. Their own heraldic monster, 
the Dragon, has been the national Ensign of China from time 
immemorial. The Eagle is identified with the very name of 
Rome. Of the Flags of our own country, the Bayeux Tapestry 
of the Conqueror's Consort has preserved for us some of the 
earliest authentic examples. These are for the most part small 
in size, and they generally terminate in three points. They 
bear simple and indeed rude Devices, such as a Pale, or a Pale 
and tbree Bars, or some form of Cross, with a group of Roundles, 
generally three in number; Nos. 526, 527, PL XXIX. A figure 
of a Dragon was in use by the Saxons at the time of the Conquest, 
No. 223 A, PL XII., and it appears to have been retained amongst 



FLAGS. 287 

their Ensigns of War by the early Norman Princes. In the 
twelfth and thirteenth centuries repeated mention is made of 
Car StandardSy which were of snch ample dimensions that they 
required to be displayed from a species of car, which also con- 
veyed them from place to place. 

I. With the Crusades, when Heraldry began to assume a 
definite form, Flags became subject to established rules. The 
earlier Saintly Ensigns, which were simply portraitures of such 
popular Personages as St Cuthbert of Durham, St. Peter of 
York, and St. John of Beverley, still were displayed, as of yore ; 
but the regular Military and National Ensigns in the thirteenth 
and fourteenth centuries were more strictly heraldic, and each 
had its own proper signification. The three principal varieties 
of these mediaeval Ensigns were the Pennon, the Banner, and 
the Standard. 

1. The Pennon was small in size, pointed or swallow-tailed at 
the Fly, and. borne immediately below the Lance-head of the 
knight whose personal Ensign it was. It was charged with the 
Badge, or other armorial Device of the Bearer, and sometimes 
richly fringed with gold. The Devices were chained upon the 
Pennon in such a manner, that they would appear in their 
proper positions when the weapon was laid for the Ohai^e. The 
Brass to Sir J. D'Aubernodn, a.d. 1279, affords a good example 
of this symbol of Knightly Bank; No. 310, PI. XXIX. Other 
early examples of Pennons occur in the Elsyng Brass to Sir 
Hugh de Hastings, and in the well-known illumination in the 
Louterell Psalter. 

2. The Banner was square in form, or nearly so, and was 
charged with the Coat of Arms of the owner, and not with any 
other Device. It was borne by Knighta Bannerets, who ranked 
higher than the Enights of the Mediaeval Chivalry, and also by 
Barons, Princes, and Sovereigns themselves. A Pennon with 
its points torn off would make, or at any rate would represent, 
a Banner ; and this was the form of ceremonial obseived when a 



288 FLAGS. 

Knight, in reward for his gallantry, was advanced to the rank of 
of Banneret on the field of battle by the Sovereign himself, 
present in person, under his own Boyal Banner displayed. 

The Boll of Gaerlaverook gives the Blazon of the Banners of 
nearly one hundred of the Nobles and Bannerets who were 
present with Edward I. in his Campaign against Scotland in 1300. 
The first on the Boll is the Banner of Henry de Laci, who is 
thus introduced by the Chronicler : — 

" Henry, the good Earl of Lincoln, burning with valour, which 
is the prevailing sentiment of his heart, the Leader of the First 
Division, had a Banner of yellow silk with a purple Lion 
rampant;" No. 628, PL XXXV. 

The Brass to Sir Symon de Felbryge, K.G., has preserved 
an example of a Boyal Banner. It is that of Bichard H., to 
whom Sir Symon (as the inscription at his feet declares) was 
Banner-Bearer. It shows the Boyal Arms quartering France 
and Englandj and impaled with the arms of the Confessor; 
No. 629, PL XXXV. 

(For further notices of Boyal Banners, see Chap. XIX., See. 2.) 

The Banner, it will be observed, was the Ensign of both the 
Banneret himself, and of his own retainers and followers, and 
also of the Division of an army that was under his command. 

In the early days of Heraldry, Bannerets of high rank appear 
occasionally to have borne Banners charged with insignia alto- 
gether different from their Shields of Arms. Thus SmoN de 
MoNTFORT, Earl of Leicester (temp. Henry III.), whose shield 
is, gu., a Uon rampt. org., the tail fourchSe, bears a Banner jper jxi^ 
tndenied org. and gu., the tinctures of his shield. This Banner is 
considered to refer to one of the great Baron's many lordships, 
the Honour of Hinkley in Leicestershire : (see Introduction to 
Sir Harris NichoUu' BoU of H. III., p. xiii.) 

Banners were in use in the middle ages at sea, as well as on 
land ; and in addition to these regular Ensigns, it was a pre- 
vailing custom to emblazon ike BaiU of the shipping of those days 



IrAKCE PIrAGS, PEKNONS, STAHDARDS. &amp;? 

CHAPTERS XIV ZV:iI 




p:;^^e xx:x 



FLAGS. 289 

With armorial infiignia, and thus the sails themselves became 
Flags, as in No. 530, PI. XXXV. Many equally curiotis and 
interesting illustrations of this practice occur in early seals. 

During the times of the Todors, and indeed towards the close 
of the Plantaoenet era also, the Banners of Princes and Nobles 
displayed many quarterings, but they retained their distinctive 
character in being identical in their blazoning with shields of 
arms. Two remarkable examples of these Banners are carved 
in bold relief, as accessories of the monument of Ludovic Hobsart, 
E.G., in Westminster Abbey : these Banners wrought in stone 
have four quarterings, and their staves are so adjusted that they 
form mouldings of the canopy-shafts, while at the base of the 
monument they are held by a lion and a falcon. In the Heralds' 
College numerous curious drawings of Banners are preserved, 
all of them having their staves held by some Supporter, while the 
Banners of Nobles and Princes are represented as being ensigned 
with Coronets of ample size. 

3. The STAJiDARD, in use in the reign of Edward III., and in 
especial favour in the times of the Tudors, was of large dimen- 
sions, and always of considerable length in proportion to its 
depth, and tapering towards the extremity ; and it was divided 
^er fesse into two tinctures. (See p. 128, and Nos. 312, 315, 
316, PI. XXIX.) Standards were also generally divided lend' 
wise into compartments by Motto-Bands — that is, by Bands 
charged with some Motto of the owner: these Standards also 
varied in their size in accordance with the rank of the personage 
to whom they belonged. No. 313 in Plate XXXV. represents 
the ship standard of the Earl of Warwick, noticed at p. 129. 
And No. 314, p. 286, is one of the Standards of Henrt Plan- 
TAGENET, of Bolingbrokc, (emblazoned in Harleian MS., 4632), 
which is a peculiarly characteristic example of the heraldic flags 
of the middle ages; it is perfesse arg. and az., the livery colours 
of the Lancastrians, having at the head the Cross of St. Oearge^ 
and semis of Badges of Prince Henry, red roses, the De Bohun 

u 



290 FLAGS. 

white mcanj golden vBoodrdocks {or roots of trees,) and /ox'i UuU 
prefer. Standards appear to have been used solely for the purpose 
of display, and to add to the splendour of military gatherings 
and royal pageants. 

In a *' Book of Standards," (a.d. 1590, in CoU. ^rm.), one 
example of Edward IV. is jper fesse az, aud gu., fringed org, and 
vert ; it has at the head the Cross of St. Oeorge, followed by a 
white lion pass, guard, royally crowned, the motto — Dieu el num 
Droyt, and twelve roses, six gules in chief, and six ai^. in base, 
all of them irradiated. Another Standard of the same Prince, is 
sem^e of white roses; and a third has one very large white 
rose-euHSoleil and eight smaller ones. Upon a field org, and az,, 
semSe of red roses, Henry Y. displays his chained antelope. 
Henrt YII. has his banners org, and vert, seme'e of red and wMie 
roses, vfiih a dragon gu. (See also Excerpta RistoricaJ) 

II. The National Banners of England, Sootland, and Ireland 
are severally the Crosses of St. Cfeorge, St. Andrew, and St, Patrick, 
Nos. 60, 61, 62, PI. III. From the Crosses of St George and 
St Andrew in combination, the First '* Union Jack,'* No. 63, 
p. 26, was formed, and declared to be the National Ensign of 
Great Britain by James I., April 12, 1606. 

The era of the Second " Union Jack,'' No. 64, p. 26, the glorious 
Flag that we now know as '* the Flag of England," dates from 
the commencement of the present century. It is a combinittion 
of the three Crosses, Nos. 60, 61, 62. 

The Standards of the Middle Ages are evidently the proto- 
types of English Ensigns of later times. These Ensigns, three in 
number, their tinctures, Bed, White, and Blue, were first can* 
toned with the Cross of St. George, No. 631, PI. XXXVI. ; then 
the '* St. George " was superseded by the first Union Jack, 
No. 632 ; and finally, when the present '* Jack " was adopted, 
it took the place of its predecessor in the National Ensigns, 
where it still remains. The " White Ensign," however, now is 
not a plain white Flag, but a " St. George" cantoned with the 



BANIIERS, STANDimD, HELM &amp; SSIIi. 

:rirT£?:sx:v y^r.i rni: ^&gt;:\\ 




r-.U /Xa/ 



FLAGS. 291 

" Jack:" Nob. 633, 634, 636, PL XXXVI. The " White" and 
the ** Blue Ensigns " are restricted to the Boyal Navy and the 
Yacht Clubs, the '* Bed Ensign" being in universal use as the 
''Ensign of England." This same Bed Ensign has also been 
worn by the Bed Squadron of the Boyal Navy, as the White 
and the Blue Ensigns have severally been the distinctiTe insignia 
of the White and the Blue Squadrons. Early in the present 
year (1864), however, by the authority of the Lords of the 
Admiralty, and with the sanction of the Crown, a very important 
and equally singular change has been made in the use and sig- 
nification of our national naval Ensigns. Hitherto the Navy has 
been divided into three ''Squadrons," the "Bed," the " White," 
and the " Blue," under the orders of Admirals, Vice-Admirals, 
and Bear- Admirals, also distinguished by the same three Colours : 
the Flags of all " Admirals of the Bed " have been plain red ; 
those of aU "Admirals of the White" have been the St. George; 
and the Flags of all Admirals of the Blue Squadron of the Boyal 
Navy have been plain blue. The recent change has assigned the 
Blue Ensign to the "Naval Beserve;" and thus, the White 
Ensign has become ihe Ensign of the Boyal Navy, and the Bed 
Ensign is now the Flag of the Mercantile Marine. This new 
arrangement virtually abolishes the long-established and well- 
known " Squadrons " of the Navy and of the Admirals of England. 

The Flag of the Admiralty is red wiih a yeUaw anchor and 
cable sei fease-tnse. No. 128, p. 39. 

Pendants, long and very narrow streamers, either red, white, or 
blue, and charged at the head with a Cross of St. Gkorge, are the 
symbols of command in the Boyal Navy, and indicate that a 
vessel is in commission, but commanded by an officer of lower 
rank than an Admiral. 

The Military Flags of England now in use may be grouped 
in the two grand Divisions of " Oaoaky Banners;'' (they are 
styled '* Standards," but they are, and they ought to be entitled 
"Banners"), and "Infantry Colaura:' The Banners of the 

u 2 



292 FLAGS. 

Gavaby are small in size; their colour is determined by the 
colour of the regimental Facings ; they are chai^d with the 
Cypher, Number, peculiar Heraldic Insignia, and the " HonourB " 
(such significant words as " Waterloo," " Alma," " Sobraon,** 
&amp;o.) of each Begiment. The Banners of the Household Cavalry, 
however, are all crimson, and are richly embroidered with the 
Eoyal Insignia of England. 

Every Infantry Eegiment or Battalion of the Line has its own 
•• Pair of Colours." Of these, one is the " Queen's Colour " — a 
** Union Jack" charged with some of the regimental Devices 
the other is the ** Regimental Colour," and its Field is of the 
same tincture as the Facings; it is cantoned with a small 
**Jack," and bears the Cypher, Number, Device, Motto, and 
Honours of the Corps. At the first, each Infantry Begiment had 
one " Colour " only ; then there were three to each Begiment ; 
and in the Beign of Queen Anne the " Colours " were reduced 
to their present number of a " Pair." The " Colours " of the 
Foot-Guards reverse the arrangement observed in the Line. 
Their ** Queen's Colour " is crimson, either with or without a 
cantoned Jack, but, always charged with the Boyal Cypher and 
Crown, and the Begimental Devices. The ** Begimental 
Colour " of the Guards is the Union Jack. The Guards also 
have small " Company Colours." 

The Boyal Artillery and the Bifles of the Line have no 
Colours. 

The Volunteer Begiments have at present been left to deter- 
mine both whether they should carry " Colours," and also what 
should be the character of their " Colours " whenever they may 
decide to adopt them. What may be termed " the Volunteer 
Banner," is worthy of the Force. It is charged with the figures 
of an archer of the olden time and a rifleman of to-day, with the 
admirable motto, " Defence, not Defiance,** 

The Flags of England, it will be understood, are the Flags of 
the entire British Empire. 




No. 242. No. 247. 

Roses of York and Lancaster. 



CHAPTER XIX. 

THE ROYAL HERALDRT OF ENGLAND. 
SECTION L 

ABMS or THB SEIOinNG 80TEBEIGN8 OF ENGLAND. 

Definite Heraldic Insignia have been assigned by more than 
one writer on English Heraldry to those Saxon Princes who 
mled in England before the Norman era; the eaijy shields, 
however, must be regarded simply as evidences of comparatively 
modem ingenuity, since the genuine Royal Heraldry of England 
unquestionably dates its origin from a period subsequent to 
the successful invasion of William of Normandy. Even the 
Heraldry of the Norman Sovereigns themselves can scarcely be 
accepted as altogether free from doubt or uncertainty. After 
the Conquest, Wiluam I. is said to have assumed the ** Two 
golden Lions, or Leopards, of his Norman Duchy," as the Arms 
of his Kingdom of England; and these two lions (it does not 
seem necessary to retain their other probable title of " Leopards," 
see p. 67), are considered to have been borne by "William's 
successors, until 1154; when, on his accession, Henry II. is 
supposed to have added the one golden Lion of Aquitaine, (in 
right of his Queen, Auanore of Aquitaine), to his own paternal 
and royal shield. Stephen is sometimes said to have borne on a 



294 THE BOTAL HERALDRY 

red shield, three golden cerUaurs armed with bows and arrows, or 
" Sagittaries ;" it has been conjectured, however, that this idea 
may have arisen from the circumstance of the " Sagittary " 
having been Stephen's Badge, and that it was mistaken for his 
arms. Since the time of Henrt II., the three golden Ucns upon a 
field of red have always been held to be the Botal Arms of 
England. They have been associated with other devices, as will 
presently be seen ; but still in a peculiar sense, the *' three lions 
peasant guardatU or,'' have been, as they still are, the *' three 
Lions of England'' It must be added, that Richard I. for some 
time after his accession retained the arms he had borne, as 
Count of Aquitaine, gtdeSj two lions conibattant or, as appears from 
his first Great Seal. After his return from the Crusade, Hichard 
adopted the three lions, as they probably were borne by his 
father. 

As the Kingly office exalts a Sovereign Prince above all other 
ranks of men, so are the Eoyal Arms of a Sovereign distinguished 
in a peculiar manner from all other heraldic insignia. This 
distinction is dearly conveyed by the term Arms of Dominion. 
These arms thus symbolize the Hoyaliy of a Prince Regnant, as 
well as declare his personal individuality. Accordingly, these 
Royal Arms are inseparable from the rank and office of Royalty ; 
and they can be borne, without some Difference, by no person 
whatever except the Sovereign. In the case of the Daughters 
of the Sovereign, until a comparatively recent period, it was 
held to be a sufficient distinction that the Royal Arms should be 
borne by them chaiged upon a lozenge, or impaled with the arms 
of their husbands.^ It must be distinctly understood, that 
Heraldic Law forbids the Royal Arms to be quartered, without 
some Difference, under any circumstances whatever — ^unless, 
indeed, the person quartering the Royal Arms might be able to 
advance a title to the Crown itself, as in the instance of Eliza- 
beth Plantagenet, Queen of Henry VIT. 

In the persons of Sovereigns, all minor ranks and titles are 



OF ENGLAND. 295 

merged in their Eoyalty; and, in like manner, whatever arms 
they may have home before their accession, are merged in their 
Boyal Arms and absorbed by them ; and no other arms can be 
quartered with the Boyal Arms. 

Boyal Consorts may impale the arms of the Sovereigns to whom 
they may have been united in marriage ; and a Sovereign may 
impale, on a separate shield, the arms of his or her Consort. 

The Modifications and Changes that have taken place, fix)m 
time to time, in the blazonry of the Boyal Shield of England, 
may be briefly described as follows : 

I. The Norman Princes, William 1., William II., Henry I., 
and Stephen, a.d. 1066-1154 : gtdes^ iwo lions passant gtiardant, in 
pde, or; No. 536, PL LVIH. 

II. The Plantaqenet Princes, Henry II., Bichabd I., John, 
Henry III., Edward I., Edward II., and Edward III., till the 
thirteenth year of his reign, a.d. 1154-1340, gu., three lions pass, 
gvard., in pale, or. No. 536 A, PI. LVIII. ; and No. 198, p. 61. 

The three lions appear on the second Great Seal of Bichard I. ; 
on the Great Seals of John, Henry III., Edward I., (on the 
bardings of the King's charger, as well as on his shield), and 
of Edward II.; and on the first and second Great Seals of 
Edward III. It is a singular circumstance, that the legends 
on the Great Seals altogether omit any notice of England and 
of England's Boyal Estate, until the second Great Seal of 
Henry III., which for the first time bears the words— dei: 
GRATIA: anglie: rex: &amp;c. 

m. In consequence of the claim advanced by Edward III., 
in the tenth year of his reign, to the Crown of France, (ke Boyal 
Arms of (he French Kings (No. 2, p. 12) were introduced, 
A.D. 1340, into the English shield, and (by what was then 
a new heraldic process) they were quartered with the Lions of 
England, and precedence in this heraldic arrangement teas given to 
the Fleurs de Lys, which were charged upon the first and fourth 
quarters of the English shield, semie over their azure Jidd, exactly 



296 THE ROYAL HERALDRY 

as they were borne by the Sovereigns of France ; No. 536 b, 
PL LVIII. 

The third Great Seal of Edward III., published in England, 
Feb. 21, 1340, and the noble Seal which superseded it in the 
following June, both bear shields charged with Fraace aind Eng- 
land, quarterly, the France being aemie de lys. It is to be observed 
that Edward 111. had placed a fleur de lys on either side of his 
first Great Seal, a.d. 1327. 

IV. The Plantagenet Princes, Edward III., Eichard II., 
and Henry IV. (Lancastrian Plantagenet) during .the earlier 
years of his reign, a.d. 1340 to about 1405 ; Quarterly : — 1 and 4, 
France Ancient (semee de lys); 2 and 3, England; No. 536 b, 
PI. LVin. 

This quartered shield is blazoned in the Boll of Arms of the 
20th Edward III. ; and it appears upon the person of the King 
in the Brass to Sir Hugh Hastings at Elsyng, Norfolk, in the 
same year 1347. This shield also appears upon the Burghersh 
monument in Lincoln Cathedral, and it remains upon the 
monument of Edward III. himself at Westminster; No. 536 b, 
PI. LVIII. ; and No. 286, Chap. XX. 

Upon his Great Seal, Richard II. retained the arms of his 
grandfather without any change; but elsewhere he deb'ghted 
to associate with this shield the armorial insignia (No. 78, PL I.) 
attributed to Edward the Confessor. Over the entrance to 
"Westminster Hall the two shields appear on either side, admir- 
ably sculptured in bold quatre-foiled circles. Each shield rests 
upon a white hart lodged, and is supported by figures of angels. 
Sometimes Richard II. impaled his hereditary quartered shield 
with the arms of the Confessor. An example occurs in the 
Brass to Sir Symon de Felbryge, K.G., the King's Banner- 
Bearer, who is represented with the Royal Banner (impaled 
and quartered) resting or his arm; No. 529, PI. XXXV., and 
No. 536 c, PL LVIII. 

About the year 1365, Charles V. of France, with a view 



OF ENGLAND. 297 

apparently to distinguish between his own arms and the fleurs 
de lys borne by the English claimants of his crown, reduced the 
number of his fleurs de lys to three only. The same change was 
effected by Henry IY. in the 1st and 4th Quarters of the Arms 
of England; and impressions of his Great Seal, taken in the 
years 1406 and 1409 exist, which bear Vie quartered arms, (on 
banners instead of shields), charged with three fleurs de lye only. 
This modification of the French shield, which bears three fleurs 
de lys only, is styled in Heraldry, *' France ModerUy** and thus is 
distinguished from the shield sem^e de lys, or " France AncientJ' 
See Nos. 536 d, and 636 b, PL LVIII. 

V. The Lancastrian Plantagenet Princes, Henry IV., after 
the first few years of his reign, Henry V., and Henry VI. ; the 
Yorkist Plantagenet Princes, Edward IY., Edward V., and 
BiCHARD III. ; and the Tudor Sovereigns, Henry YII., Henry 
YIII., Edward VI., Mary, and Elizabeth, about a.d. 1405 — 1603 ; 
Quarterly : — 1 and 4, France Modem ; 2 and 3, England ; No. 536 d, 
PI. LVIII. 

Queen Elizabfth also sometimes bore Irdand^ No. 537 a, PI. 
XLYI. Thus, in her Funeral Procession the Banner of Ireland 
is associated with the Banners of Wales, Chester, and Cornwall ; 
{Vetust. Mon. iii., 18, Ac.) See also Section 7 of this Chapter. 

EdwardS3^. sometimes quartered the arms of the Confessor with 
France and England quarterly. Many fine original examples of 
the quartered shield of France Modem and England are still pre- 
served. Amongst the most characteristic, in addition to those 
upon seals, are the shields in King's College Chapel, Cambridge, 
upon the Percy shrine at Beverley Minster, and upon the monu- 
ments of Henry YIT. and of his mother, in Westminster Abbey. 
In a very few instances this shield may be observed quartering 
England and France instead of France and England ^hskYmg Eng- 
landy that is, in the 1st and 4th quarters : such a shield is in the 
south porch of Gloucester Cathedral, which was built between 
the years 1420—1437. 



298 THE BOYAL HERALDRY 

When James I. ascended the English throne, the arms of botii 
Scotland and Ireland were ipcorporated into the Boyal Shield 
of England. The arrangement then adopted involved Quarierly 
qwaiering. The arms of Scotland are blazoned in No. 103, PL V. ; 
and those of Ireland are, ostira, a Harp or, stringed axgeni. No. 
537 A, PL XLVI. For a Paper on the Origin of ^ Tresmre cf 
Seoilandf see ArchcBologia, xxx., 388; and for a Paper on the 
Harp of Ireland, see Notee and QuerieB, Series 1, xii., pp. 328 — 
350 : also see Seton's Heraldry of Scotland, p. 425. Fine ex- 
amples of the Boyal Shield of the Stuarts appear upon the plinth 
of the Statue of Charles I., at Charing Cross, and in the second 
quadrangle of St. John's College, Oxford. 

VI. The Stuart Princes, Jambs L, Charles L, Charles IE., 
and Jambs IL, a.d. 1603—1689, Quarterly: — 1 and 4 Grand 
Quarters, France Modem and England quarterly ; 2nd Orand Quarter, 
ScoOand; 3rd Grand Quarter, Ireland; No 537, PL LVIU., 
from the Stuart Monuments in Westminster Abbey. 

In Scotland precedence has frequently been given to the Scot- 
tish insignia in the National Arms, in Seals, Banners, &amp;o. ; but 
certainly the same marshalling of the Boyal Arms and their 
accessories ought to obtain, without any modification or differ- 
ence whatever, as well in North and South Britain as through- 
out the British Colonial Empire. See Seton, pp. 425 — 446. 

VII. William III. retained the same shield, but, as an elected 
King, he placed upon it in pretence his paternal arms of Nassau, 
az., hiUetSe, a Lion rampant or. No. 538, PI. XLVII. Mart bore 
the Stuart shield; and, during her lifetime, the Boyal Arms 
appeared impided, to denote the joint sovereignty of the King 
and Queen. The Boyal Shield, accordingly, was charged on 
both the Dexter and the Sinister half with the same Stuart arms, 
those on the Dexter having Nassau in pretence; No. 539, PI. 
LIX., from the Great Seal. 

William and Mart ascended the throne, Feb. 13, 1 689. Mart 
died, Dec. 28, 1694, when Wiluam bore No. 639 a. PI. LIX. 



OF ENGLAND. 299 

On her aooession, a.d. 1702, Anne bore the Stvart amiB 
No. 537, Fl. LYIII., and retained them until the union with 
Scotland, May 1, 1707, when another change took place in the 
Boyal blazonry. 

VIII. The Stuart Queen Anne, a.d. 1707—1714: Quarterly: 
— 1 and 4, England impaUng Scotland; 2, France Modem; 3, 
Ireland. The shield upon the Great Seal adopted on the occa^ 
sion of the Union with Scotland, bore only England imjHding 
Scotland, In this impalement the Tressure of Scotland extends 
only to the chief, sinister side, and base of the field. The ex- 
ample. No. 540, Fl. LIX., is from the shield upon the base of 
the statue of Queen Anne, before St. Faul's Cathedral ; other 
good examples are at Blenheim Falace. 

The Succession of the House of Hanover led to a place 
being assigned for the Arms of Hanover in the Boyal Shield of 
England. The Arms of Hanover are thus blazoned : Per pale 
and per chevron : 1, gtUes^ two Lions passant gvardantf in pale, or^ 
for Brunswick, (the same as the Norman Shield of England) ; 

2, or, semee of Hearts^ a Lion rampant azures for Lunenburoh ; 3, 
gtdes^ a Horse courant argent, for Westphalia ; and, over aU, an 
ineseukheon gmUt^ charged with the golden Orown of Charlemagne; 
No. 641, PL XLVn. 

IX. The Sovereigns of the House of Haboveb, George I., 
George II., and George III., from August 1, 1714, till January 
1, 1801. Quarterly : — 1, England impaling Scotland; 2, France; 

3, Irdand; 4, Hanover; No. 642, PI. LIX. ; from the tympanum 
of the portico of the Church of St. Martin-in-the-Fields, London. 
In this composition one half only of the 1st quarter is assigned 
to the Lions of England. 

Upon the first of January, 1801, by Boyal Proclamation, the 
French fleurs de lys were removed from the Arms of England, 
and the Boyal Shield of England assumed the general aspect 
with which we have long been familiar. 

X. The Sovereigns of the House of Hanover, George IQ., 



300 THE BOTAL HERALDRY 

George IV., and William IV., from January 1, 1801, till June 
20, 1837 ; Quarterly :— 1 and 4, England; 2, Scotland; 3, Ireland; 
and over aU in pretence^ Hanover. From 1801 till 1816, the Ines- 
cutcbeon of Pretence was ensigned by George III. with the 
Electoral Bonnet of Hanover, No. 542 a, PL LXXVI, ; but horn 
1816 till June 20, 1837, the same shield was ensigned with a 
Boyd Grown ; No. 643, PL LIX. 

XI. On the happy accession of Her Majesty, Queen Victoria, 
June 20, 1837, the Arms of Hanover were removed from the 
Boyal Shield ; and thus the Royal Arms of England are now 
simply a combination of the insignia of the Three Bealms of the 
United Kingdom, England, Scotland, and Ireland, as in No. 
543 A, PL LIX. This noble shield, I venture to surest, 
might assume a still more impressive aspect, were a ship to 
appear in the fourth quarter, in place of the repeated lions, as the 
cognizance of the British Colonial Empire. From the time of 
Edward III., the shield charged with the Royal Arms of Eng- 
land has been encircled with the Oarterj charged with the Motto of 
the Order. See Nos. 286, 289. 

In Plates LVIII., and LIX., I have placed before students of 
Heraldry the entire series of the Royal Shields of England, with 
the sole exception of that modification of No. 543, which would 
be charged with the Electoral Bonnet of Hanover instead of an 
Imperial Crown. 

SECTION n. 

THE BOYAL BANNEB8 OF ENGLAIID. 

The Boyal Banners of England have always borne the same 
blazonry as the Boyal Shields. The earliest blazon of a Boyal 
Banner of which I am aware, appears in the Boll of Caerlaverock, 
A.D. 1300. The Chronicler styles the animals ^'Leopards" and 
not LionSf (see p. 57); and he uses the descriptive epithet 
" courant " instead of passant. The Boyal Banner of Edward I. 
the Chronicler of Caerlaverock describes after this characteristic 



THE ROYJUJ ARMS OP EX&amp;liKND, 

lAPTRR XIX 




teLA^.JI 



THE HOYAD XRMS OF EXGJiA^'D. 

CHAFTrR x:x 



W'JlJJAMm A MARY 




A.D. 1707 to J7U 



AD. 1714 to 1801. 




AD 1816 to 1837 . &gt;l M THE QUEEN. 




P]at^L]&gt;C, 



OF ENGLAND. 301 

manner : ** On his Banner were three Leopards, conrant, of fine 
gold, set on red ; fierce were they, haughty and cruel, thus 
placed to signify that, like them, the King is dreadful to his 
enemies. For his hite is slight to none who inflame his anger ; 
and yet, towards such as seek his friendship or submit to his 
power, his kindness is soon rekindled." 

Edward III. on his Standards placed his quartered shield at 
their head, and powdered them with Fleurs de lys and Lions, 
as in No. 312, PL XXIX. Drawings of many curious examples 
of both these Banners and Standards are preserved amongst 
the collections at the Heralds' College; see p. 290). Several 
of the Sovereigns, in addition to the Banner of their Boyal 
Arms, used other Banners and Standards charged with their 
Badges, It is to be observed that the Royal Banners of Arms 
charged their insignia upon their entire field, without any 
accessories, imtil the time of the Stuarts, when the Arms were 
sometimes either associated with other Devices, or the Flag 
bore the en^re Boyal Achievement charged upon the centre of its 
field. Curious examples of Boyal Standards thus emblazoned 
appear in the pictures, now at Hampton Court, representing 
the embarkation of Charles II., in 1660, and of William III., in 
1688. More recently the Eoyal Banner has always displayed 
the Arms of England, after the early habit, blazoned over its 
entire field, and vnthout any accessory. See Chap. XVill. 

SECTION ni. 

BOYAL 8UFP0BTEBS. 

With the Blazonry of the Boyal Shield itself, the Supporters, 
which appear on either side of it, as if discharging sentry 
duty, are habitually associated by the students of historical 
Heraldry. 

Supporters are said to have been introduced by Edward III. ; 
the feet, however, is doubtful. The Supporters that have been 



304 THE ROTAL HERALDRY 

Badges : Henrt IE. The Broom, showing the leaves aiid seed- 
pods of the plant : an Escarbunde : a Sword : and an Olive- 
branch. 

Richard I. A Star issuing from a Crescent, No. 544, PI. XLVII.: 
a Star and Crescent separateHy : a mailed Arm, the hand grasping a 
broken lance : a Sun on two Amhors, with the motto, '' Christo Duce." 

John and Henry III. A Star issuing from a Crescent, No. 544, 
PI. XLVII. 

Edward I. A Bose or, stalked ppr. 

Edward II. A Castle of Castilk. 

Edward HE. Bays descending from a Cloud : the Stock or Stump 
of a Tree, couped : a Falcon : a Qriffin : an Ostrich Feather : a 
Fleur de lys : a Sword. 

Ejchard n. An Ostrich Feather: the Sun behind a Cloud: 
the Sun in splendour: a white Hart lodged, (from his mother, 
Joan of Kent, see No. 525) : the Stump of a Tree : a white 
Falcon. (Examples on his EfiBgy, and at Westminster Hall.) 

Henry IV. The Monogram SS: a Crescent; a Fox^s TaU : a 
Stock or Stump of a Tree : an Ermine or Oennet : a crowned Eagle : 
a crowned Panilier : an Ostrich Feather: an Eagle displayed: a 
(hlumbine Flower : the Lancastrian red Bose, and the white Swan of 
the De Bohuns. 

Henry V. An Ostrich Feather : a chained Antelope : a chained 
Swan: a Fire-Beacon. These Badges are sometimes grouped 
together, as in the Monumental Chantry of the King at West- 
minster. 

Henry VI. A chained Antelope: a spotted Panther: and two 
Ostrich Feathers in saltire. 

He first assumed as a regular Motto the ancient royal war 
cry of England, Dieu et mon Droit, 

Edward IV. A black Bull, (Clarence): a black Dragon, 
(Ulster): a white Wolf and a white Lion, (Mortimer): a white 
Hart : a Falcon and Fetter-lock : the Sun in splendour : a white 
Bose wi^ Bays. 



OF ENGLAND. 306 

BiCHARD ni. A White Bose: the Sun in splendor: a White 
Boar : and a Falcon with a Virgin's Face, holding a White Bose. 

Henry VII. A PortcuUis: a White Qreyhoimd courant: a 
Bed Dragon, (Cadwallader) : a Dun Cow, (Warwick) : a Haw- 
thorn Bush royalty crowned, with Cypher, h.r., No. 645, PI. XLYII. : 
a Bose of York and Lancaster, No. 248, Fl. XHL : and a crowned 
Fleur-de-lys. 

Henry VIII. A PortcuUis : a Fleur-de-lys : a Bose of York and 
Lancaster : a White Cock : a White Oreyhound courant. 

Catherine of Arragon had for Badges the Pomegranate, the 
Bose, and the Sheaf of Arrows; (See the Monument of Prince 
Arthur Tudor, at Worcester). Anne Boleyn had a Falcon 
crowned and holding a Sceptre ; Jane Seymour had a Phcenix rising 
from a Castle, between Tudor Boses ; and Eatherine Parr had a 
Maiden's Head crowned, rising from a large Tudor Bose, 

Edward VI. The Sun in splendor, and the Tudor Bose, 

Mary. A Pomegranate: a Pomegranate and Bose conjoined: 
the Tudor Bose impaling a Sheaf of Arrows, ensigned with a Crown, 
and surrounded by Bays, She sometimes used as a Motto the 
words, " Veritas Temporis FUia,'' 

ELiZABh;rH. The Crowned Falcon with a Sceptre (of her mother), 
and the Tudor Bose, with the Motto, ^ Bosa sine spina,'' In addi- 
tion to the established Boyal Motto, *' Dieu et mon Droit," she 
often used as her own Motto, " Semper Eadem." 

James I. The Hiistle, and the Bose and Thistle dimidiated and 
crowned. No. 646, PI. XLVII., with the Motto, " Beati Pacifici:' 

Charles I., Charles II., and James II. The same Badges as 
James I., without his Motto. 

Anne. A Bose-hraneh and a Thistle growing from one stalk, and 
crowned; on the Great Seal of the year 1707. 

From this time personal Badges ceased to be adopted; but 
the Bose, Hiisile, and Shamrock, all of them imperially crowned, 
as the Badges of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and the Motto, 
*' Dieu et mon Droit," have permanently taken their becoming 

X 



306 THE ROYAL HERALDRY 

parts in blazoning the Koyal Achievement of England. The 
Red Dragon also, with his wings elevated, and passant upon a 
mount vert, is still the Boyal Badge for the Principality of 
Wales. 

SECTION V. 

THE ABUB OF BOTAL O0NSOBT8. 

With the Hoyal Arms of the Heigning Sovereigns of England, 
the student of Historical Heraldry will frequently desire to asso- 
ciate those that were borne by the Consorts of these Sovereigns, 
They constantly occur in connection with those records of 
English History, of which Heraldry is at once the Chronicler 
and Illustrator. 

1. Matilda of Flanders : OyronnSe or and az,j an inesciUcheon gu, 

2. Matilda of Scotland : Scotland: No. 103, PI. V. 

3. Adelais of Lowntn : Or, a Lion rampt. az., langued gu. 

4. Matilda of Bologne : Or, three torteaux. 

5. Eleanor of Aquitaine and Ouyenne : On., a Lion passant guar- 
danior, 

6. Berenoaria of Navarre : Az., a Cross arg., afterwards super- 
seded by Na/oarre Modem : See " Arms of Navarre " in Chap. 
XXXII. 

7. Isabel of AngoulSme : Lozengy, or and gu. 

8. Alianore of Provence : Or, four Pallets gu. ; No. 7, PI. I. 

9. Alianore of Castile : Quarterly, Castile and Leon ; that is, 
1 and 4, gu., a Castle triple-towered or : 2 and 3, arg,, a Lion rampt, 
gu., No. 135, PI. 1. She also bore Paidhieu, in right of her 
mother, and this shield on her monument at Westminster alter- 
nates with England and Castile and Leon. Ponihieu is, or, three 
Bendlets az., within a Bordure gu,, No. 547, PI. XL VII. On her 
seal, her Effigy stands between a Castle surmounting a Lion on 
her Dexter side, and on her Sinister side a Lion surmounting a 
Castle; the reverse has a shield of England suspended by its 
guige from a Tree. 



OF ENGLAND. 807 

10. Margaret of France : France Ancieni dimidiated by England^ 
No. 322, PI. XYin. ; also a shield of England upon a seal, the 
field of which is semSe de lys. No. 332 a, PI. LXXX. 

11. IsABELLE of France: France Ancient dimidiating Navcare, 
(in right of her mother) : See Nayarbe in Chap. XXXII. She 
bore England on one shield, and France with Navarre on another ; 
see No. 335 a, and p. 152. 

12. Phiuppa of Hainatdt : Quarterly ^ 1 and 4, or, a Lion rampt. 
«a., for Flanders ; 2 and 3, or^ a Lion rampt. gu., for Holland : 
(See p. 159.) She bore these, her paternal arms, guart&amp;red with 
England ovdy : No. 337, p. 159. Her arms were also impaled by 
England and by France and England quarterly. 

13. Anne of Bohemia: Quarterly; 1 and 4, Oermany, org., an 
Eagle displayedy uM two heads, sa. ; 2 and 3, Bohemia, gn., a Lion 
rampant, queue fourcMe, org., crowned or. She impaled these arms 
with the shield of Richard II., upon which the arms of the 
Confessor were marshalled per pale with Frarice and England ; 
consequently the complete shield would be blazoned tiercie in 
pale, dc; No. 349, PI. XXIII. 

14. Isabel of France : France Modem : impaled, a.d. 1397, by 
EiCHARD II. ; No. 350. This Impalement may be considered to 
have first suggested to Henry IY. the change in his own arms 
from France Ancient to Drance Modem, 

15. Joanne of Navarre: Quarterly ; 1 and 4, Eureux, az., three 
fleura de lye or ; over all, a Bendlet, compony org. and gu. ; 2 and 3, 
NoBorre ; see Navarre in Chap. XXXII. Impaled by Henry IV. : 
See monument at Canterbury, and Chap. XXII. 

16. Catherine of France: France Modem. Impaled by 
Henry V. 

17. Margaret of Anjou : Quarterly of six : — 

1. Hungary : Barry of eight org. and gu. 

2. Naples : France Andent^ with Lohd of three gu. 

3. Jerusalem ; Arg., a Oroes potent between four plain Oroeses or. 

4. Anjou : France Ancient, wUMn a Bordure gu. 

X 2 



308 THE BOTAL HERALDRY 

5. De Barre : Az.^ iux) BcarbeU haurient addorsed and crusiUy fiUikh 
or^ dU wUhin a Bardure gu, 

6. Lorraine ; Or, on a hend gu,, three Eaglets displayed arg. 
Impaled by Henry VI. : No. 362, PL XXIII. 

18. Elizabeth Widville, or Woodville : Quarterly of six: — 

1. Luxembourg: Arg., a Lion rampt. double tailed gu,, croumed 
or; for Peter, Count de Luxembourg, her maternal grand- 
fieither. 

2. De Baux : Quarterly ; I and 4, gu,^ an EdoUe of 1 6 rays org, ; 
2 and 3, az, ; semSe de lys or ; for her grandmother, Margaret, 
daughter of Francis de Baux, Due d'Andr^e. 

3. Cyprus : Barry of ten arg. and az., over aU a Lion rampt. gu. 

4. Ubsins : Ou., three Bendlets arg. ; a Chief per fesse of the second 
and or, charged with a Rose of the first : for her great-grand- 
mother, Susan, daughter of the Count des Ursiks. 

6. St. Paul ; Ou., three PaUets txariSe ; on a (M^ or a Label of five 

points, az. 
6. Widville : Arg., a Fesse and a Canton conjoined gu. 

Impaled by Edward IV. 

19. Anne Neville : Ou., a SaUire arg. ; differenced with a Label 
of three points company of the second and az. 

Impaled by Eichard III. 

In the '' Warwick Boll " she quarters, Beauchamp, Montagu, 
and Monthermer with Neville. 

20. Elizabeth of York: Quarterly; 1 and 4, Ulster, Or, a 
Cross gu. ; 2 and 3, Mortimer. 

Impaled by Henry VII. Emblazoned on the Monuments of 
the Countess of Richmond, and of Henry VII. and Elizabeth of 
York, Westminster Abbey, No. 351, PI. XXIII. 

21. Catherine of Arragon: Quarterly ; 1 and 4, Grand QuarUr$, 
Castile and Leon, qaarterly ; 2 and 3, Ghrand Quarters, Arragox, 
Or, four PaUets gu., impaling Sictly, per SaUire, 1 and 4, Arbagox, 
2 and 3, arg., Eagle displayed sa., beaked and membered gu. In the 
Base Point, the Badge of Grenada, arg,, a Pomegranate slipped ppr. 



OF ENGLAND. 309 

The Su/pporters of Qneen Catherine of Arragon were a Lion and 
an Eagle, 

Impaled by Henry YUI. 

22. The AmiB of Queen Anne Boletn are the first which 
exemplify the usage, introduced by Henry VIII., of granting to 
his Consorts *' Augmentations " to their paternal arms. It is a 
striking illustration of the degenerate condition of Heraldry 
under the second Tudor Sovereign. 

Anne Boleyn : Quarierly of six : — 
1. Lancaster. 
Augmentation 2. Enooulesme, or Naples. 
3. Guyenne. 

4. Quarterly, 1 and 4; or,aChief indented az., for Butler; 2 am2 3, 
org.. Lion rampt, mi., crowned gn.,fcr Bochfort. 

5. Brotherton. 

6. Warrenne. 

Impaled iby Henry VIII, (See the choir-screen of Ring's 
College Chapel, Cambridge.) 
Supporters : a Leopard, and a nude Griffin. 

23. Jane Seymour : Quarterly of six :— 

1. Or, on a Pile gu,, between six Fleurs de lys az., three Lions of 
England. An Augmentation. 

2. Setmodr. 

3. Beauchamp of Haeke : Vairie. 

4. Sturmy, or Esturmi : Arg., three demi Lions rampt, gu. 

5. Mac Williams : Per bend arg. and gu., three Soses, bendwise, 
counterchanged, 

6. CoKER : Arg., on a Bend gu., three Leopard^s Heads or. 
Impaled by Henry VHI., and blazoned frequently at Windsor 

and Hampton Court. 

Supporters : A Lion and a Unicom. 

24. Anne of Cleves : Qu., an Inescutcheon arg., over aU, an Es- 
carbuncle of eight rays or. 

Impded by Henry VIII. 



310 THE ROYAL HERALDRY 

25. Catherine Howard : Quarterly:^ 

1. Az.^ ikree Fleurs de h/s, inpodet or^ bekoemtuH&gt;Flancheserm,^ead 
charged tmih a Boae gu. 

2. Brotherton. 

3. Howard Jtfodem. 

4. Az,, iufo Liana of England; (he Verge of (he EsaUeheon charged 
with four half Fleurs de lys or. 

1 and 4 are Augmentations. 
Impaled by Henry VIII. 

26. Catherine Parr : Quarterly of six : — 

1. Arg., an a Pile gu,, between six Bases of the 2nd, ikree other Boset 
of the 1st. (Augmentation.) 

2. Arg., two Bars ae., within a Bordure engrailed sa, 

3. Boss of Kendall: Or, three Water-bougets sa. 

4. Marmion : VairSe, a f esse gu. 

5. Fitz Hugh : Az., three Chevrons, interlaced in base; a Chief or. 

6. Green : Vert, three Harts at gaze or. * 
Impaled by Henry VIII. 

27. Philip, King of Spain. The sams arms as (hose q/* Catherine 
ofArragan. (See 21.) Impaling the arms of Mary. 

28. Anne of Denmark. The arms borne by Anne, daughter of 
Frederick H., King of Denmark and Norway, are a complicated 
example of the elaboration of details held in such high esteem 
amongst the continental Heralds of comparatively recent times. 
These arms may be described as follows : A Cross gu., surmawUed 
of another org. In the Dexter Canton, or, semee of hearts ppr., 
three lions pass, guard, in pale az,, crowned or, for Denmark ; in the 
sinister canton, gu., a lion rampt., crowned qr, holding in his paws a 
battle-axe org., for Norway ; in the dexter base quarter, az., three 
crowns ppr., for Sweden ; and in the sinister base quarter, or, ten 
hearts, 4, 3, 2, and I, gu., in chief a lion pass, guard, az,, for 
Jutland. In the base of the shield, beneath the Cross, the 
ancient ensign of the Vandals, gu., a wyvem, its taU nou&gt;ed md 
wings expanded or. Upon the centre of the Cross an escutcheon 



OF £NaLAND. 311 

of pretence, charged with Quarterly, 1. Or, /too lions paw. guard, 
az.^ for Sleswick; 2. Ou.^ an inescuicheony housing a nail in every 
point ihereofy in triangle, hetioeen as many hoUy-leaves, all ppr,, for 
H0L8TEIK ; 3. Qu., a aujan arg,, heaked aa., gorged unth a coronet jppr., 
for Stormerk ; and 4, Az., a chevalier, armed at aU points, brand- 
ishing his sword, his helm plumed, his charger org., the trappings or, 
for DiTZMERS. Over the whole, on an inescntcheon, or, two bars 
gu,, for Oldenbubgh, impaling for Dalmenhurst, az., a cross patSe 
fitchSe or. 

Borne on a separate shield, and mai-shalled with the Boyal 
shield of James I. 

This shield, with some modification of its marshalling, (see 
Section 7 of this Chapter), is already well known and honoured 
in England, through the auspicious and happy alliance between 
our own Prince of Wales, and the Princess Alexandra of Den- 
mark. 

29. Henrietta Maria of France : France Modem, This shield 
was sometimes borne impaled by St. George. 

Inhaled by Charles I. A very fine example of this impaled 
shield is carved above one of the archways in the inner 
quadrangle of St. John's College, Oxford. 

30. Catherine of Bragama : Arg., on each of five escuicheons, in 
cross, az,, as many plates, in saltire, the whole within a hordure gu,, 
charged with eight casUes or, for Portugal. 

Impeded by Charles IE. 

31. Mary D'Este, of Modena : Quarterly : — 1 and 4, Este, org,, 
an eagle displayed sa,, crowned or ; 2 and 3, Ferrara, az, three fleurs 
de lys or, within a hordure eounterindented or and gu. 

Impaled by James IE. 

32. Prince George of Denmark : The same as 28. 

33. The arms of the unhappy Consort of George I. do not 
appear ever to have been exhibited in England. As she was her 
husband's cousin, her arms were probably the same as those 
which he himself bore before his accession to the English crown. 



312 THE ROYAL HERALDRY 

34. Caroline Wilhelmina of Brandenburgh Anspach : The arms 
of his Consort, impaled by GfiORaE IL, are quarterly of fifteen 
pieces; the following blazon from German authorities differs 
in several particulars from that given, from a contemporarj 
print, by Mr. Willement in his most excellent work on ''Begal 
Heraldry:"— 

Qu/orterly of fifteen : — 1. Magdeburg, per fesse gu, and org., each 
bordered: 2. Prussia: 3. STKm^n, az,, a griffin segreant gu,, crowned 
or : 4. PoMERANiA, org., a griffin segreant gu. : 5. Wenden, org., a 
griffin segreant bendy gu, and vert : 6, Cassuben, or, a griffin segreant 
aa, : 7 and 9, Crossen, org., an eagle disp, sa. : 8. Halberstadt, 
per pale arg. and gu,, bordered : 10. Nuremberg, or, a lion rampt. 
sa,, crowned, within a bordure compon^ arg. and'gu. ; 11. Minden, 
gu., two keys in saUire arg, ; 12. Hohenzollern, quarterly arg. cmd 
sa., bordered : 13. Halberstadt, per pale arg. and gu. : 14. Star- 
GARD, per fesse gu. and or: 16. Ou., for right of Begedia : and, 
over all, on an inescutcheon, Brandenburgh, org., an eagle disp. gu. 

Impaled by George II. 

35. Charlotte of Mecklenburgh Strditz: Quarterly of 6:— 1. 
Mecklenburgh, or, a buffalo's head cabossed sa., armed org., through 
the nostrils an annulet of ihe last, ducally crowned gu., tiie attire pass- 
ing through the crown: 2. Wenden, az., a griffin segreant or: 3. 
Schwerin Principality, per fesse az. and vert, in chief a griffin 
segreant or, the base bordered round the entire field arg. : 4. Katz- 
burgh, gu., a cross couped arg., ducally crowned or: 5. Schwerin 
County, gu., an arm embowed, in armour to the wrist, issuing from 
clouds on the sin. side, and holding between the finger and tJiumh a gem 
ring, all ppr., round the arm a riband tied az. : 6. Rostock, or, a 
buffalo's head in profile sa., armed arg., ducally crowned gu., over all 
an escutcheon of pretence, per fesse, gu. and or, for Stargard. 

Impaled by George III. 

36. Caroline, daughter of Charles Frederick William, Duke 
of Brunswick, K.G. The following blazon of the arms of 
Brunswick is from the Gennan authorities, Spener, Liebmacher 



OF ENGLAND. 313 

and Triebs : in the 3rd, 5th, 7th, and 9th quarters, this Shield 
thus blazoned differs from the Shield of the Duke, which is 
displayed upon his Garter-Plate at Windsor. Quarterly of 
12:— 

1. LuNENBUSGH, OT, semSe of hearts gu,, a lion rampt, az. : 2. Bruns- 
wick, gu., two liona pass, guard, in pale or : 3. Eberstein, arg,, a 
lion rampt. az., crowned gu. : 4. Homberg, gu., within a hordure com- 
ponee arg. and az., a lion rampt. or : 5. Diephold, az., a lion rampt. 
org., crowned or : 6. Lauterbergh, gu., a lion rampt. or : 7. Hoja 
and Bruckhausen, Quarterly, 1 and 4, or, two hearts paws cauped 
and addoraed in pale so. ; 2 and 3, gyronny of eight arg. and az., a 
(Mef harry of four gu. and of the first : 8. Diephold, az., an eagle 
disp. org., (or, very commonly, arg., an eagle disp. az.) : 9. Hohn- 
stein, or^ two bars gu., a chief chequSe arg. and gu. : 10. Regen- 
STEIN, org., a stages attire gu. 11. Clettenberq, arg., a stag trip- 
ping sa. : 12. Blangkenberg, org., a stages attire sa. : the stages 
attires in the 10th and 12th quarters are so disposed as to follow 
the contour of the escutcheon, and therefore they are either in 
fesse or in bend, as the case may be. 

Impaled by George IV. 

37. Adelaide of Saxe Meinengen. Quarterly of 9:— 1. Thu- 
ringia, az., a lion rampt. harry of eight arg. and gu., crowned or : 
2. Cleves, gu.j an escarhunde of eight rays or, the rays issuing from 
an inescutcheon arg. : 3. Juliers, or, a lion rampt. sa., crowned gu. : 
4. Meissen, or, a lion rampt. so., crowned gu. : 5. Saxon t : 6. Berg, 
arg., a lion rampt. gu. crowned or : 1. Westphaua, arg. an eagle 
displayed gu., crowned or: 8. Landbsberg, or, two pales az.: 9. 
Thdringia Pfalz, scl, an eagle displayed or : 10. Orlamunde, or, 
a lion rampt. sa., crowned gu.: 11. Eisenberg, arg., three hars az. : 
12. Pleissen, az., a li&amp;n rampt. or : 13. Altenberg, org., a rose gu., 
seeded and harbedppr.: 14. (?«., for right of Regalia : 15. Brkhna, 
or Engern, arg., three hoterols (scabbard-tags) gu. : 16. Marck, or, 
a fesse chequSe arg. and. gu. : 17. Anhalt, gu., a column in pale org., 
crowned or, the pedestal of the last : 18. Hennebergh, or, on a mound 



314 



THE ROYAL HERALDRY 



ffert a cock «a., crested and wMed gu, : 19. Bayensberoh, org,, three 
chevranels gu. 

Impaled by Wiluam IV. 

38. His late Royal Highness, Albert, the Prince CJonsobt, 
bore the Arms of Saxony, quarterly, with the Royal Arms of 
England differenced with his own Label— a Label of three poifiU 
org., charged on the central point wWi a cross gu; (See p. 167). It 
is customary in England to blazon the foliated bend of Saxony, 
as a lend treflSe vert, or as a lend arcMe coronettSe^ or a coronet ex- 
tended in bend; this very beautiful Charge, however, which 
admits of rich and varied ornamentation, is a ChapUt or WreaUk 




No. 353.— Shield of Arms of H.B.H. the late Prinoe Gonsobt. 



of Bue, and on the Continent it is blazoned a Orancdin^ £rom the 
German Krandein, 'a small garland.' The ancient Arms of 
Saxony were harry of ten or and sa, : oa an Augmentation to these 



OF ENGLAND. 315 

Aims, when he conferred the Dnkedom of Saxony npon Bern- 
HABD, Gonnt of Ascania, the Emperor Babbabossa took off the 
Crown of Bne which he wore npon his head, and threw it ob- 
liqnelj across the shield of the newly-created Duke. (See Notes 
and Queries, 8rd Series, No. 130, p. 522.) 

The Shield of His late Boyal Highness, No. 353, is encircled 
with the Garter of the Order, and ensigned with his own Coronet 
(No. 623) ; it is also supported by the Lien and Unicom Supporters 
of England, both of them differenced with the same Label as the Arms, 
and the lAon crowned with the Prince's own Coronet ; the Crest is 
the Crest of England, bnt the Lion is differenced with the same Ldbd 
and ensigned with the same Coronet; the Achievement may be 
farther augmented with the insignia of the various Orders of 
which the Prince was a Knight The Motto is, Tk£U und Fest, 
No. 353. 

SECTION VI. 

THB IMFEBZAL CBOWN, AND THE OOBONKTB OF THE PBINGB8 AND 
PBINCE8BBB OF THE PBEBKNT BOTAL FAJOLT. 

The Emblem and Ensign of Sovereignty, the Imperial Crown 
of Great Britain, has undergone several very decided changes in 
its form and enrichments, all of which come under the direct 
cognizance of the historical Herald. Many original authorities 
exist, which in this matter naturally illustrate and corroborate 
each other's contribution to heraldic History. These authorities 
are the Great Seals, the Coinage, Monumental Effigies, and mis- 
cellaneous Illuminations, Paintings, and Sculptures. 

The earliest fonn of the Crown worn by the English Kings 
after the Conquest, (which appears from various Illuminations 
closely to resemble the Crowns of the Anglo-Saxon Princes), is 
exemplified in the effigies of Henry II., and his Queen Alia- 
NORE; of BiCHARD I., and Isabella of AngoulSme, at Fontevraud &gt; 
of BERENOARiA,at TEspau, near Mans, and of John, at Worcester. 
This Crown is a richly jewelled Circlet of gold, heightened with 



316 THE BOYAL HERALDRY 

what may be entitled heraldic Strawberry Leaves. These 
sculptured Crowns are all much mutilated, but still they plainly 
declare their original character. The Crowns of Bichard and 
Berenqaria have four large leaves only. Those of Henbt, 
Alianore, and Isabella have four smaller leaves alternating 
with the four larger ones. The Crown of John has also eight 
leaves, alternating large and small, and in form 'they are 
almost true trefoils. Of this group of examples, the most perfect 
are the Crowns of Bichard I. and Berenoaru, Nos. 548, 649, 
PI. XLIL 

The Effigies of Henry III. and Aliakore of Castile have 
Crowns of trefoil-leaves of two sizes, a slightly raised point 
intervening between each pair of the leaves. These Crowns 
doubtless were once enriched with real or imitative jewels and 
other adornments, which now leave no other traces of their 
former existence than the small holes for attaching them to 
the Crowns themselves; No. 198, p. 61. 

The Coins of Edward I. show that his Crown was similar 
in character to those of his Consort and his Father. 

The Effigy of Edward II., at Gloucester, still retains, almost 
uninjured, its sculptured enrichments. The Crown is formed 
of four large, and four small Strawberry Leaves, rising with 
graceful curves from the jewelled Circlet, and having eight 
small flowers alternating with the leaves ; No 550. 

The Crown appears to have remained the same as that which 
I have last described, xmtil the accession of the first Lancastrian 
Sovereign, Henry IY. The elaborately sculptured Effigies of 
this Prince and of his Queen, Joanna, at Canterbuiy, wear 
magnificent Crowns, No. 551. Both have the same general 
character, the Crown of the Queen being distinguished by its 
smaller size and more delicate workmanship. In each, the 
jewelled Circlet is heightened by eight Strawberry Leaves, and 
as many Fleurs de lys, the whole alternating with sixteen small 
groups of pearls, three in each. These sculptured images of 



OF ENGLAND. 



317 



that " golden care," which was the one aim of Henry of Lan- 
caster, may be supposed to be faithful representations of the 
splendid " Harry Crown," broken up and employed as security 




No. 550.— Crown, Edwakd II. 



No. 551.— Crown. Henby IV. 



for the loan required by Henry V., when about to embark on 
his expedition to France. Kymer records that the costly 
fragments were redeemed in the eight and ninth years of 
Henry VI. 

The next change in the Crown of England is one which com- 
pletely alters its general aspect. This new feature consists in 
arching over the enriched Circlet with jewelled Bands of gold, 
and surmounting the enclosed Diadem with a Mownd and Cross, 
The enrichments of the Circlet itself at the same time are so 
far changed, that Crosses paUes occupy the positions before 
filled by the Strawberry Leaves, and Boses, or Fleurs de lys ap- 
pear instead of the small clusters of Pearls. The arched Crown 
at first has the arches elevated almost to a point; after a 
while, the arches are somewhat depressed at their intersection ; 
then this depression is considerably increased; and at length, 
in the Crown of Her Majesty, Queen Victoria, the arches, 
which bend over almost at right angles, are flattened above at 
the intersection where the mound rests upon them. At first, 
also, the arches recede inwards from their spring from the 
Circlet ; then they slightly project beyond the Circlet ; and now 
they rise almost vertically. The arches, in the first instance, 
are numerous, but in the Great Seal of Eichard III. there are 



818 TH£ ROYAL HERALDRY 

four arches only. Their nnmher in the Crown that ensignfi 
the Hawthorn Buah Badge of Henry YII., is six, No. 545, 
PI. XL VII. ; but by Henry VIII. they are reduced to four. The 
Grown remained without any change during the Beigns of 
Edward^ YI., Mary, and Elizabeth; except that in the Great 
Seal of Elizabeth she appears wearing a small Diadem having 
eight arches. The Grown of the Stuart Sovereigns, James I. 
and Charles I., has eight arches. On the Oreat Seals of 
Charles n., James II., and Anne, the Grown has four arches; 
and that number has since remained unchanged. 

The arched Crown was introduced by Henry V., probably 
when a simpler emblem of Boyally was constructed on the 
breaking up of the more costly and precious Crown of his 
Father. It will be understood that until the close of the 
Beign of Edward IY., arched and unarched Crowns are both 
represented in sculpture, illuminations, and other works. The 
arched Crown, the arches having an ogee curvature, appears 
for the first time upon the Great Seal of Edward YI., and we 
learn from illuminations that a Crown similar to his own was 
worn by his Queen. 

The arches of the Crown always spring from behind the 
crosses patees that heighten the circlet. The crosses on the 
Great Seal of Henry YIII. appear to be only four in number ; 
but the Tudor Crown generally is represented with eight crosses 
and as many fleurs de lys. Upon the monument of the Countess 
of Bichmond, the mother of Henry YII., there are seven shields 
and one lozenge of arms; of the former, three are ensigned 
with large crowns heightened with eight crosses, as many 
fleurs de lys, and sixteen small roses, and the crowns are arched 
with two depressed arches which support a mound and cross 
pat^e ; three more of these shields have similar crowns without 
the arches ; and one shield and the lozenge are without crowns, 
No. 557, Chap. XXIII. At the head and feet of the monument 
of Henry YII. there are crowns of four arches splendidly en- 



CROWNS. 



•liAPTER X\\ 



BKRENOAKIA. 




BERENGARIA. 



RICHARD I 




RICHARD I 






?:..fe xLi: 



OF ENGLAND. 319 

riohed. The Crown of James I., represented on his Great 
Seal, retains eight crosses and eight fleurs de lys, without any 
roses ; and Charles II. reduces both crosses and fleurs de lys 
to four, the same number as the arches. The velvet cap, worn 
within the Crown, appears for the first time upon the Great 
Seal of Henby Vm. 

The successive changes in the Crown of England are ex- 
emplified in No. 652, PI. XLII., Henry V., from Westminster 
Abbey ; No. 553, Henry VI. ; No. 554, Edward IV., and No. 
555, from the Great Seal of the same king; No. 556, Chap. 
XXn., Henry VII., from King's College Chapel, Cambridge ; 
it will be observed that the Royal Motto in this splendid Crown 
is charged upon the circlet of the diadem; No. 557, Chap. 
XXin., Crown from the monument of Margaret, Countess of 
Richmond, in Westminster ; No. 558, PI. XLIL, Henry VIII. ; 
at Norwich on a building, a shield of Henry VII I. is ensigned 
with a Crown of the simple form shown in No. 558 a ; Nos. 
559, and 560,*P1. XLII., Charles I., and Charles II., both from 
their Great Seals. Thus the Crown is brought to assume the 
character shown in No. 562, which has four crosses patees, and 




No. 562. — The Imperial Crown. 

four fleurs de lys, set alternately on the circlet, and four pearl- 
studded arches which rise from within the crosses, and carry at 
their intersection the Mound and Cross. The arches in this 



320 THE ROYAL HERALDRY 

example are depressed, and their sweep projects somewhat he- 
yond the circlet. 

The Crown of Her Majesty's immediate predecessors, No. 562, 
has already become historical, having been superseded by the 
new State Crown, No. 624, made for the Coronation of the Queen, 
and in use on those occasions of high state ceremonial which 
require the presence of this emblem of Royal Dignity. This 
Crown differs from No. 562 rather in enrichment than in its 




No. 624. — The State Crown of Heb Majesty the Queen. 

arrangement. There is, indeed, a decided difference in the 
contour of the arches, which rise almost perpendicularly from 
within the crosses patees, and are somewhat elevated (instead of 
being depressed) at their intersection. The Crown is completely 
covered with diamonds, and is also richly studded with various 
other costly gems. The arches assume the form of wreaths of 
the rose, thistle, and shamrock formed of brilliants. The cap is 
of purple velvet, lined with ermine. 

The Heraldic Crown which enjoys the Royal favour, differs 
from both No. 562, and the State CroWn, No. 624, and inclines 
to the type of an earlier time ; this Heraldic Crown of our Most 



OF ENGLAND. 321 

Gracious Sovereign is represented in No. 334, page 332, ensigning 
the Hoyal Shield of Arms. 

The Coronet of H.R.H., Albert, the late Prince Consort, 
differs from the Imperial Crown in having eight instead of fonr 
arches ; these arches rise from strawberry leaves and aie curved. 
The details of the enrichments are also peculiar : No. 562 a. 




No. 562 A. — Coronet of the late Pbince Consort. 

The Coronet of H.R.H., Albert Edward, Prince of Wales, has 
two arches only, whiqh rise from a jewelled circlet, heightened 
as the Imperial Crown. The arches aie surmounted by a mound 
and cross. The cap is of crimson velvet : No. 563. 



j^^ 




No. 563.— Coronet of H.B.H., the Prince op Wau» 

The Prince of Wales also bears, as the ensign of that Prin- 
cipality, a jewelled circlet heightened with four crosses patees 
and as many fleurs de lys, which encloses a plume of three ostrich 
feathers rising above the circlet itself. Below, on a ribbon, the 
motto, " Ich Dien:' No. 235 a, PI. XV. See also pages 256 and 
328, and Chap. XXIV., Sect 1. 

Y 



822 THE BOTAL HERALDRY 

The OoroneiB of the other Princes, the Sons of the Queen, and 
of the Princesses, the Danghteis of Her Majesty, have the circlet 
heightened with four crosses pat^s, and fonr fleurs de lys. The 
cap, of crimson velvet, is lined with ermine, and is surmounted 
by a golden tassel ; No. 664, PL XLI. 

The Coronets of the Pringgs and Princesses, the Grandsons and 
Qranddaughters of the Queen, differ from those of their Boyal 
Uncles and Aunts, only in having the circlet heightened with 
two crosses pat^, as many strawberry leaves, and four fleurs de 
lys; No. 565. 

The Coronets of the Koyal Cousins of the Qoeen have the 
circlet heightened with crosses pat^es and strawberry leaves only ; 
No. 566, PL XLL 



SEcrnoN vn. ^ 

ABMS OF THEIB BOTAL mGHNE88B8, THE PRINOB AND PRINCIfiSB OF WAUB, 
AND OF THE OTHEB HEMBEB8 OF THE BOTAL FAMILT. 

I. Arms of T.R.H., The Prince and Princess of Wales. 

1. H.R.H., Albert Edward, K.G., K.S.L, The Prince of Wales, 
is also Duke of Cornwall and of Rothsay, Earl of Chester, of 
Dublin, and of Carrick, Baron Renfrew and Lord of the Isles; 
also, in right of his lamented Father, the Prince is Duke of 
Saxony. The Armorial Insignia of His Royal Highness, ac- 
cordingly, assume a threefold division, and they are blazoned 
with an aggroupment which exemplifies three distinct yot united 
orders of Marshalling. The happy alliance formed by the 
Prince of Wales with the Princess Alexandra of Denilabk, 
now Princess of Wales, adds a fourth to these three ordere of 
Marshalling. 

The Arms usually borne by the Prince of Wales are thus 
blazoned :— 2%6 Boyal Arms of England, differenced with the LcM 
of the Heir Appareni'-a Ldbel of three points org. ; over aU, Saacony : 
Svpporters^^The Lion and Unicom of England, differenced with the 



OF ENGLAND. 328 

Labd and enngned with the C(^&lt;mei of ihe Prince ; Orest, — The Crest 
of England, hut the Lhn differenced and croumed as the dexter Sup- 
porter : in association with the Crest, a1x&gt;Ye the Arms, is placed 
the Feather Badge of the Prince ; Motto, — Ich JDien : the shield is 
encircled with the Garter of the Order, and ensigned with the 
Princess own Coronet, 

The early usage of Heraldry wonld require that the dexter 
Supporter and (he Crest should be ensigned with the Imperial Crown, 
while differenced with the Label of the Heir Apparent. It also ap- 
pears to be at variance with both the spirit and the practical 
usage of the true Historical Heraldry of England, that the Arms 
of Saxont, the paternal and hereditary Insignia of his Eoyal 
Father, should be marshalled upon an escutcheon of pretence 
with the shield of the Prince of Wales, when that Shield does 
not display the Ensigns of the Prince's Dignities of the second 
order. The Arms of the Prince of Wales as Heir Apparent have 
a distinct individuality of their own, with which nothing, except 
the Arms of the Boyal Consort of the Prince, ought to be directly 
associated. It would, however, be both strictly correct and 
much to be desired that the Prince should bear a Second Shield, 
charged in the first grand quarter with his own quartered Arms 
duly differenced as Heir Apparent, and having in the other 
grand quarters the Arms of all the other Dignities enjoyed by 
His Hoyal Highness marshalled in becoming order. Or, what on 
the whole would seem to be still more desirable, the Prince 
might bear upon a single shield, (with a quartered inescutcheon 
itself charged with a Shield of pretence,) all his armorial in- 
signia duly marshalled in conformity with their historical sig- 
nificance. 

jarhe Arms of the Second Order borne by the Prince of Wales 
are these : — 

1. Corn WA1.L :—«»., ten bezants, four, three, two, and one, 

2. RoTHSAY : — Scotland, differenced with a label of three points org, 

3. Chester : — az., three garbs or. 

y2 



824 THE ROTAL HERALDRY 

4. Dublin : — Ireland, differenced wUh a hbd of ihreepoitUs org. 

5. Lord of the Isles : — arg.&lt;, on waoea of the sea ppr, a lymphad 
sa. 

6. For the feudal Earldom of Carrick, and Barony of Benfreh', 
ancient dignities of the Heir Apparent to the Scottish Crown,— 
or, a chevron gu. 

7. To this group I add the Arms of the Principality of Wales, 
— quarterly, 1 and 4, gu,, a lion pass, guard, or ; 2 and 3, or, a Uon 
pass, guard, gu.. No, 697, PI. LX. 

The Arms of the Prince's Dukedom of Saxe Coburo Qotha con- 
stitute a distinct Order in themselves : see p. 314. 

In No. 720, PI. LUI., I have marshalled the ArmB of the 
Prince, the three Orders of the Arms being displayed upon a 
single Shield, with'an Inescutcheon bearing a Shield of Pretence. 
This shield — that is, the prinuiry shield in this composition — bears 
the Arms of the Prince as Heir Apparent : these are the Boyal Arms 
of the reigning Sovereign differenced with a silver label, — as the 
Royal Arms for the time being, thus differenced, have been always 
borne by the Heirs Apparent of England, the Princes of Wales, 
since the time of the Black Prince. Upon the Secondary Shield— 
the Inescutcheon in No. 720— are marshalled all the armorial 
Insignia of the second order borne by the Prince of Wales, 
including the Arms of the PrincipaUty, to which in deference to 
their rank I have yielded the first quarter : thus this Ines- 
cutcheon bears, 1. Wales; 2. ComwaU ; 3. IMhsay ; 4. Chester; 
6. Carrick; 6. The Isles; 7. I&gt;fi5/i». The third Shield, marshalled 
in pretence over all, is charged with Saxony, the foreign Duke- 
dom of the Prince of Wales. 

It is a very singular circumstance that the Arms of the Prin- 
cipality of Wales should heretofore have been omitted, as if by universal 
consent, from the Quartered Shield of the Prince of Wales, The 
ancient Arms of Wales are not marshalled upon the Eotal 
Shield with England, Scotland, and Ireland; but, I presimie, 
Wales is held to be included within the realm of England, and 




AHMS OF H.K.H. THE PRINCE OP WALES K.CV 
jn^KK OP SAXOX^' OF CORNWALL, &amp; OF ROTHSAY; 
EARL OF CHKHTER. OF CARR1CK.&amp; OF DUbLiN; 
BARON RENFRKW. LORD OF THE ISLE, fa .Ac. &amp;f 



mSK (ff THE n?? DKLMTIES OF THE PRINCE OF W.U.ES. 
AM) OF THE PRIX(TPALITY OF WALES 




Hale I.A 



OF ENGLAND. 825 

therefore it is considered to be represented heraldically by the 
Lions of England. Accordingly, when he differences the Boyal 
Shield with his own silver label, the Prince of Wales would 
bear the Arms of Wales as Prince — precisely as his Botal Mo- 
ther bears the Arms of Wales expressed with those of England, 
as the Sovereign, in Her own Boyal Arms. At the same time, 
it appears altogether to be desired that the distinct Arms of the 
Principality of Wales should be marshalled in the first quarter of 
the Quartered Arms of the Prince of Wales. Upon the base- 
ment of the monument of Queen Elizabeth, as I have shown, 
(Chap. XXIII.) are four Shields of Arms ; one of this group is 
Wales ; the three other Shields of the group are Ireland, Corn- 
wall, and Chester : thus the Arms of the Principality have a 
recognized place with the separate Shields of Cornwall and 
Chester and also of Ireland. The Arms which I have just 
blazoned for the Princijpality of Wales, No. 697, PI. LX., are taken 
from an Achievement of Queen Elizabeth which is^ engraved 
in '* Begal Heraldry:" I am bound, however, to add that Owen 
Glendwyr, as Prince of Wales, \.d. 1404, blazons the Lions on 
his Secretum as rampant, No. 698, PI. LX., (see also ArchoBclogia, 
xrv., 619, and xxix., 407.) As Princes of Wales also, Edw. Plan- 
tagenet, son of Edward IY., and Arthur Tudor, son of Henrt YU., 
bore separately for the Principality, arg.^ three lions coward in pale 
gu,^ No. 699, PI. LX. : this coat is said sometimes to have been 
assigned specifically to North Wales, while the Arms of SoiUh 
Wales would be No. 698. 

2. H.B.H., Alexandra, Princess of Wales, as Daughter of the 
King of Denmark, bears the Boyal Arms of Denmark wUhotU dny 
Difference. 

The Arms of Denmark proper are, or, semie of human hearts gu., 
three li&amp;ns pass, guard, in pale az., crowned gold : but the Shield of 
the Princess, after the manner of Continental Heraldry, is one 
of many Quarterings ; and it is very remarkable that this Shield, 
when blazoned with all its various Bearings, in its Marshalling 



326 



THE BOTAL HERALDRY 



exhibits precisely the same order of anungement as distinguishes 
the Shield, No. 720, PI. LIU., of the Prince of Wales himself. 

The Quartered Shield of the Princess of Wales will be readily 
understood by the aid of the annexed diagram. No. 687. Several 
of these quarterings have been blazoned in Section 5 of this 
Chapter. ' 




No. 687. 

Diagram, No. 687 : — a, a, a, a, the whUe Onms o/ Denmark upon 
red: 1. Denmark : 2. Schleswio : 3. Sweden Modern : 4. Iceland, 
gu.^ a gtockfiah org,, croumed or, (See Heraldry of Fiah, p, 174): 
/u^4r ? 5. Faroe Islands, oz., a cock passant arg, : 6. Greenland, ok., 
a polar hear rampl. arg. : 7. Jutland : 8. Ensign of the Vandals. 
On the secondary Shield, or Inesoutoheon, — 9. Holbtein : 10. Stob- 
merk: 11. Dietmarsgben (Ditzmers) : 12. Lanenburg, gu., a 
horse's head couped arg. On the Aird Shield, in pretence over all, 
— 13. Oldenburg : 14. Delmenhubst. These Arms are blazoned 
in Plate LXXV., No. 710. The two shields in this Plate show, 
(No. 709) the quartered shield of Denmark from a Garter-Plate 
of the year 1581, and (No. 710) the quartered shield of the Den- 
mark of today ; thus the changes which have taken place in the 
course of nearly three centuries are evident at a glance. These 



ROYAL ARMS OF DENMARK. 

CTTi^PTERJOX. fECTIONS 5 17, ^ CKAF7tR XXXYi 



/SmS lypiV BGBSE BY THE PRINCESfi OF WALES. 




ARKS BORUBBr FREDERICKS. KG. KING OF DENMARK. 




From the Gartei 7''.n':t- a* V.'nid^ 



Plate LXXV 



IMPALED LOZEXdE &amp; SHIELDS OF ARMS. 




OF ENGLAND. 827 

two shields may also be compared with the blazon of the. Arms 
of Prince Qeoroii: of Denmark in page 311. It -would seem that 
still further changes in the shield that is so closely allied with 
his own, may now be expected by our Prince of Wales. A 
century before the Qarter-Plate of Frederick II. was fixed at 
Windsor, the Arms of Denmark appear under different conditions 
of aggroupment impaled with Scotland upon the Lozenge of Anns 
of Margaret, daughter of Chhistiern I., the Queen of James UI. 
of Scotland, who was killed a.d. 1488 ; No. 719, PI. Lll. This 
Lozenge, which is blazoned in a highly interesting contemporary 
painting now in the Palace of Ilolyrood, containing the por- 
traitures of King James and Queen Margaret with various other 
personages, bears Scodandy the tressure not dimidiated, impaling 
Denmark marshalled as follows — ^the field ^ divided into four 
quarters by the Cross of Dannthrog ; in the first quarter, Scandi- 
navia or Sweden ; in the second, Denmark proper ; in the third, 
Norway Ancient ; the Sclavonic Dragon of the Vandals being in 
the fourth quarter. The Escutcheon of pretence bears, 1 and 4, 
on a field gules a device which appears to have been mistaken by 
the painter for the arms of Holstein ; and 2 and 3, Schleswig ; over 
all, on a second Inescutcheon, Oldenburgh alone. 

3. No. 568 represents the Arms of Denmark proper impaled by 
the Arms of the Prince of Wales without his secondary Ines- 
cutcheon, but charged in pretence with Saxony: this impaled 
shield, ensigned with the Coronet, Badge, and Crest of the 
Prince, and at its base having his Motto, may be accepted as 
the popular form of representing the united Arms of their Boyal 
Highnesses. 

The early and long sustained usage of impaling the Arms of a 
married Prince and Princess has been set aside by high authority 
in marshalling the Arms of the present Prince and Princess of 
Wales. The authorized arrangi^ment is such as this: — ^The 
Shield of the Prince, as it is blazoned at the commencement of 
this Section, encircled with the Garter of the Order, to the 



328 



THE ROYAL HERALDRY 



Dexter of the composition ; to the Sinister the quartered Shield of 
the Princess encircled by a Garland ; these two Shields supported 
by the Supporters of the Prince, ensigned by his Coronet, his 
Crest, and his Badge, and with his Motto in base. The Impaled 
Shield, No. 568, marshalled in exact accordance with early prin- 
ciples and early practical usage also, appeal's in every respect to 
be preferable to the present system of two distinct Shields. 




No. 568. 

The Garter-Plate of Prince Wiluam, the son of Queen Anne and 
Prince George of Denmark, marshals in pretence a Shield of 
Denmark proper ofdy, without any quarterings : and, accordingly, 
this Garter-Plate, as far as it may be accepted as an authority, 
sanctions the presence of the Shield of Denmark as I have mar- 
shalled it, without the other quarterings borne on his Boyal 
Shield by the King of Denmark himself; it must be admitted, at 



OF ENGLAND. 



329 



the same time, that this Garter-Plate in like maimer affords a 
precedent for charging Scucony in pretence upon the Arms of the 
Prince, as in No. 568. 

4. To the great interest naturally felt in the armorial insignia 
of the Prince and Princess of Wales, I am indebted for many 
valuable and gratifying communications having reference to the 
Arms of their Koyal Highnesses ; but I am not able to adduce 
any example of a Shield of the Prince of Wales, marshalled hy 




No. 718.— 



for Marshalling the Anns of the Pbinoe op Wales, K.G. 



auihoriHf with all its quarterings. My own quartered Shields, I 
need scarcely add, are merely suggestions — suggestions, however, 
based upon early precedent, and aspiring to be faithful expres- 
sions of Historical Heraldry. In order more fully to exemplify 
to Students of Heraldry the suggestive as well as the directly 
historical character of the Armorial Ensigns of the Prince of 
Wales, I now add one or two other compositions as heraldic 
studies. No. 718 marshals the Arms of the Prince of Wales 



330 THE ROYAL HERALDRY 

differenced with his own Label qwurierly ixM Saacony, That is, 
it represents the Prince as the Eldest Son and Heir of the Queen 
and of the late Prince Consort. In this Shield, Saxony appears 
alone in the 2nd and 3rd quarters, because the differenced 
Arms borne by the late Prince Consort in the 1st and 4th 
quarters of his own Shield may claim to have been in a peculiar 
sense personal to himself alone. The Escutcheon of Pretence 
in No. 718 quarters Cornwall, Chester, BoUuay, and DMin (the 
label improperly omitted) only, and it beara the feudal Shield 
of the Isles in pretence. Again, in No. 696, PI. LX., the Shield, 
which is quarterly pf five, bears Cornwall, Bothaay, the two Duke- 
doms, in chief; Chester^ ihe Isles, and Dublin, the three Coats in 
base, being marshalled in their order of hei*aldic seniority; 
Carrick, as the Shield of a feudal Earldom, is in pretence. In 
this composition, which is merely a study for marshalling the 
British and Irish Arms of the Prince of Wales, Saxony is not 
introduced. 

In Plate LIIL, the Shield which corresponds with the No. 696 
of Plate LX. appears in its proper position, in pretence upon the 
Boyal Shield duly differenced with the silver Label of the Prince 
OF Wales. The Shield of Pretence in No. 720, PI. LIII., differa 
from No. 696, only in these three respects : it bears Wales in the 
first quarter; it marshals Carrick in the fifth quarter; and it 
displays Saxony over all upon a second Inesoutcheon. 

The Arms of Carrick I have given upon ofiScial authority, as 
being, gu,, a chevron or. The Bruges, Earls of Carrick, before 
their family attained to the Boyal Dignity, bore, org,, a saUk-e and 
a chief az., (Boll Henry III.) ; and Mr. Soton (pp. 191, 195), 
with a reference to Laing's Catalogue (Nos. 164 and 783), gives 
the Seals of Duncan, Earl of Carrick, a.d. 1180, charged with 
a dragon; and that of John, Earl of Carrick, a.d. 1380, after- 
wards BoBERT III., bearing Scotland with a Label, I observe that 
Mr. Seton, at the end of his Preface has a Shield of ScoUaind 
thus differenced with a silver Label of three points, impaling Den- 



CORONETS ATTD CRESTS. 




OF ENGLAND. 881 

mark proper alone, the whole being charged upon (he Plume of 
the Prince of Wales. A Scottish Herald might also marshal for 
the Prince a Shield quarterly of Bathsay, Carrick^ and the Lies. 

U. Their Boyal Highnesses, the Princes Alfred, Arthub, and 
Leopold : — the Boyal Arms differenced toith their own LdbeU^ 
Nos. 569, 570, 571, PL XXXVL; the Crest and Supporters being 
differenced in like manner, and the Shield ensigned with the Coronet; 
No. 564, PL LXI. 

Their Boyal Highnesses, the Princess Boyal, and the Prin- 
cesses Alice, Helena, Louisa, and Beatrice: — the Boyal Arms 
differenced toith their own Labels^ and impaled by Prussia and Hesse 
for the Princess Botal and the Princess Alice ; No. 572 and 573, 
PL XXXVL ; see also Chapter XXXII. Ue Boyal Arms upon 
Lozenges, differenced wUh Aeir own Labels^ Nos. 574, 575, and 576, 
and the Supporters differenced with the same LdbelSj by the younger 
Princesses. Their Boyal Highnesses all ensign their Arms with 
their own Coronet, No. 564, but they do not bear any Crest 

H.B.H., the Duke of Cambridge, E.Q., differences the Boyal 
Arms, Supporters, and Crest, with his own Label, No. 577, 
PL XXXYI. ; and he ensigns his Shield with his own Coronet, 
No. 566, PL XLI. The Princess Mart of Cambridge charges 
the same Label upon her Lozenge of Arms. 

SECTION vm. 

The Botal Achievement of Arms of Her Majestt the Queen 
is composed of 

The Boyal Shield, bearing England, Scotland, and Ireland, 
quarterly ; the Shield being encircled with the Garter, ohaiged 
with the Motto of the Order : 

The Supporters, the Lion and Unicom : 

The Helm, with its Mantling, ensigned with the Crown, and 
thereon the Crest of England, a Lion statant guardant or, im- 
perially crowned : 

The Motto being the words, Dieu et mon Droit, upon a ribbon 
beneath the shield, from which issue 



332 



THE ROYAL HERALDRY OF ENGLAND. 



The Badges, the i2o«e, Thistle, and Shamrock, all of them en- 
grafted on the same stem. 

It would be strictly correct to add other Badges, for England, 
a red and a white Base ; for Scotland, a Thistle ppr. ; for Ireland, 
a Shamrock-leaf vert, and a Harp or, stringed arg, ; for Wales, a 
Dragon, wings, addorsed, gu,, passant on a mount vert. 

All these Badges to be ensigned with the Imperial Crown. 

Also, the Crest for Scotland, on an Imperial Crown, a Lion, 
sejant affront^ gu,, imperially crowned, holding in the dexter paw a 
sword, and in the sinister paw a sceptre, both erect and ppr. ; No. 567, 
Plate XL VI. : and 

The Crest for Ireland, on a wreath or and az., a CasUe triple- 
towered of the first, a Hart arg., attired or, springing from the gale. 

The Badges of the several Orders of Knighthood might also be 
introduced into this composition. 




No. 334. — Her Most GradouB Majesty, Vkttoria, the Qieen. 




No. 286. — Shield of Edward III., from his Monument in Westminster 
Abhey, the Garter being added. (See pp. 107 and 295.) 



CHAPTER XX. 



ORDERS OF KNIGHTHOOD, AND INSIGNIA AND AUGMENTATIONS OF 

HONOUR. 

Early in the middle ages, the Insignia of knightly rank, worn 
alike by every member of the chivalry of those days, were the 
Knight's own Sword and Lance — ^the latter with its Pennon, — his 
Shield of Arms, and his golden Spurs. Then the Crusades led 
to the formation of the Orders of priestly soldiers, so well known 
as the Hospitallers, or Knights of St. John of Jerusalem, and 
the Knights Templars. These Orders possessed distinctive In- 
signia peculiar to themselves. 

1. The HospiTALLKRS, instituted about a.d. 1092, and intro- 
duced into England about the year 1100, wore over their 
armour a black habit, charged with a silver cross of eight points, 
No. 678, PI. XXXV.; but between the years 1278 and 1289. 



834 ORDERS OF KXIGHTHOOD. 

when engaged in military duties, they assumed a red mercoai 
bearing a silver crou straight. 

2. The Templars, instituted a.d. 1118, were introduced into 
England during the reign of Stephen, about the year 1140. 
Their habit was whUej with a red cross of eight points, the form 
of this oross being identical with the white cross of the Hos- 
pitallers, No. 578, PL XXXV. The Cross of the Templars was 
worn on the left shoulder. Their war-cry was ** Beau Seafit /" 
Their Banner, which bore the same name, was per f esse aa, and 
org. It is represented in the Temple Church, London, as in 
No. 579. They also displayed above their formidable lance a 
second Banner of their own colours, white^ charged with the Oross 
of the Order, No. 580. As Badges, the Templars bore the 
Agnus Dei ; and a device representing two knights mounted on 
a single horse, to denote the original poverty of the Order. The 
present Arms of the Bairister Templars of the Inner Temple, 
which are derived from the Badge last named, are, 02., apegaxss 
salient, winged org,, (some say or\ the two horsemen of the 
early device having in later times been mistaken for wings. 
In the year 1309 the 'Knights Templars were suppressed, and, 
by a papal bidl dated April 3, 1312, their Order was abolished. 
It is remarkable that amongst the numerous knightly efiSgies 
that are in existence, and of which many fine examples belong 
to the Templar era, not a single individual commemorates any 
brother of the chivalry of the Temple. It is highly probable 
that some now forgotten rule prohibited monumental commemo- 
ration amongst those priest-soldiers, or else their ill repute 
led to the complete destruction of every personal memorial of 
them. The idea that crossed-legged military eflSgies represent 
and commemorate Templars, though still retained by many per- 
sons who prefer fanciful theories to more sober facts, has long 
been proved to be without' any foundation. 



ORDERS OF KNIGHTHOOD. 335 

3. The pecnliar form of Cross, entitled, from its resemblance 
to the Greek T, the Tau OrosSy No. 67, PL III., appears worn as 
a knightly ensign npon a small number of monumental effigies. 
This is the symbol of an Order established on the Continent, 
and styled the Order of St. Anthony. At Ingham, in Nor- 
folk, the curious effigies (now sadly mutilated) of Sir Boger de 
Bois and his Lady, wear idantles charged with the Tau Cross 
within a circle, and having the word anthon in chief, No. 481 , 
PL XXXIX. ; the date is about 1360. In the sixteenth century, 
this same cross is occasionally found attached to a chain that is 
worn about the neck, as in the brass to Henrt Stanley, a.d. 
1 528, at Hillingdon, Middlesex. The Tau Cross is borne by 
the fEunily of Drury between two mullets on a chief. 

4. Collars, composed of various heraldic devices, and worn 
about the neck, were in use in the time of Richard II. These 
Collars, however, were not regarded as insignia of any Order of 
Knighthood, as that expression is now understood by ourselves, 
and as the Order of the Garter was understood at that period. 
They were decorations of honour, and they also very generally 
denoted political partisanship. The rival Houses of Lancaster 
and York had their Collars, of which many characteristic 
examples yet remain. Private Collars were also woi-n, as a 
species of Badge, at the same period ; they-were charged with 
the personal devices of the wearers. Thus, in his Brass at 
Wootton-under-Edge, Gloucestershire, a.d. 1392, Thomas, fourth 
Baron Berkeley, wears, over his camail, a collar composed of 
Mermaids — a Badge of his House, which may possibly have been 
derived from the ** Mermaids of the Sea " of the Black Prince, 
and so may indicate attachment to that illustrious personage ; 
No. 225 A, p. 68. 

5. The Lancastrian Collar of SS is composed of a series 
of the letter S in gold, the letters being either linked together. 



386 ORDERS OF KNIGHTHOOD. 

or set in close order upon a blue and white ribbon. The ends 
are always connected by two buckles and a trefoil-shaped link, 
from which a jewel depends. This Collar was worn by persons 
of both sexes, and of various ranks. It appears, amongst many 
others, in the sculptured effigies of Queen Joanna, at Canter- 
bury; of Ralph Neville, Earl of Westmorland, and his two 
Countesses, at Staindrop, Durham; of Thomas and John Fitz- 
Alan, Earls of Arundel, at Arundel ; of BofiBRT, Lord Hunger- 
ford, at Salisbury Cathedral ; of Robert de Marmion, at Tanfield, 
Yorkshire ; of Sir Humphrey Stafford, at Bromsgrove, Worces- 
tershire; of Sir Edmund and Lady De Thorpe, at Ashwell- 
Thorpe, Norfolk; and of Sir William Phillip, K.G., styled 
Lord Bardolf, and his Lady, at Hovenngham, Notts ; also in 
the Brasses to Lord Camoys, K.G., at Trotton, Sussex ; to Sir 
Thomas and Lady Massyngeberde, at Gunby, Lincolnshire ; and 
Sir William and Lady Baqot, at Baginton, Warwickshire. An 
early example of this Collar occurs in the Brass to Sir Thomas 
Burton, at Little Casterton, Rutland : it is certain, however, 
that this Brass is several years later than the date usually given 
to it — A.D. 1382, the fifth of Richard II. Another early example, 
in the sculptured effigy of John Gower, the poet, at St. Saviour's 
Church, Southwark, has the De Bohun Swan, the fevourite 
Badge of Henry of Bolingbroke, attached as a pendant to the 
Collar ; No. 685 a, PI. XLIII. The SS Collar of Queen Joanna, 
No. 683, has been slightly injured, but it still very clearly shows 
the character of this decoration. The Collars of Lord Hunger- 
ford, A.D. 1456, No. 682, and of Sir Robert de Marmion, about 
A.D. 1400, No. 584, both of which have received some injuries, 
and that of Sir William Phillip, (whose effigy is also deco- 
rated with the Garter of the Order), which is very perfect and of 
elaborate richness. No. 686, PI. XLIII., are all eminently charac- 
teristic examples. The SS Collar was assumed by Henrt IV., 
probably many years before his accession, and by him it cer- 
tainly was distinguished as a Lancastrian ensign. 



LANCASTIIIA.N COIiliXRS OP SS 
&amp; IJSISIGNIA OP TTLE GARTIER. 




^e. 7; I 



^'i,^-^e y. 



ORDERS OF KNIGHTHOOD. 887 

In the centre of the Canopy above his monument at Canter- 
bnry, the Shield of Henry IV. is enciroled witli a Collar of SS, 
after the manner of the Garter of the Order. This shield 
bears France Modem and Englandy impaling Nawxrre and Eureux, 
No. 348, PI. XXIII. ; npon the Collar the S is repeated twenty- 
three times, and the customary trefoil clasp is charged with a 
small Eagle displayed^ apparently a subsequent addition. The 
letters SS are richly ornamented and linked together. Two 
other larger Shields, one of France and England^ and the other of 
Navarre, are also encircled vrith similar Collars of SS ; and the 
field of the Canopy is semSe of the same Collars, small and on 
ribbons, on a ground azure powdered with golden cinquefoils. 
EagleSy Oreyhaunds and Oenneta, with the Mottoes Soveratne and 
Atemperance, also take a prominent part in the heraldic decora- 
tion of this remarkable Canopy. The monument of Catherine 
Swynforde, the third wife of John of Ghent, mother of the Beau- 
forts, was originally adorned with shields of arms encircled by 
Collars of S. When I last examined the original in Lincoln 
Cathedral, the panels of the monument, which are deeply scored 
with the matrices of the lost Brasses, were standing reversed, so 
that the pendants of the Collars of S were in chief. In the 
church of St. Mary, at Bury St. Edmunds, the ceiling of the 
eastern compartment of the south aisle, once the Chantry of 
John Baret, is richly painted and diapered with beautifully - 
drawn Collars of SS, each Collar enclosing the Monogram of this 
zealous Lancastrian, I.B. 

The origin of the device itself still remains uncertain. It is 
generally supposed to have been intended to represent Henry's 
favourite motto, SoveraygnCy by repeating the initial letter of 
the word. Mr. John Gough Nichoi^, however, has suggested 
the word Seneschal, (John of Ghent was Seneschal, or High 
Steward of England), to be substituted for Soveraygne ; and 
Mr. Planch^ hints that the Swan Badge may have had something 
to do with the SS of the Collar. Possibly, after all, the repeti- 



338 ORDERS OF KNIOHTHOOD. 

tion of tho lotter S may denote rather the initials of several 
words, than the initial of any single word, though I myself 
incline to the opinion that the S is the initial of Soveraygne. 

Henrt YII., under whom the SS Collar had hy no means alto- 
gether lost its Lancastrian character, introduced his Tudor 
Badge, the PortcuUis, alternating with each 8 ; and he further 
added either a Tudor Bose or a Portcullis, as a Pendant to the 
Collar thus modified. A good example occurs in the effig}' 
of Sir John Cheyney, K.G., a.d. 1489, in Salisbury Cathedral. 
At Coleshill, in the very perfect alabaster effigy of a knight, 
A.D. 1519, the Collar of SS has a Oeorge depending from it. 
Other late examples of this Collar occur at Elford in Stafford- 
shire ; the latest there appears upon the effigy of Sir Wiluam 
Smythe, a.d. 1526 ; the pendant is a cross pat^. A still later 
example, a.d. 1548, at Sefton, in Lancashire, is the Collar repre- 
sented on the Brass to Sir William Molineux, who at Floddeu 
**duo armorum vexiUa Scotis strenu^ renstentibua sua manu cc^i,'^ 
By Henry VIII. the wearing the Collar SS was restricted to the 
degree of a Knight. This Collar with certain modifications, is 
still worn by the Heralds, by the Lord Mayor of London, and 
by the Lords Chief Justices, and some others of the Judges. 

6. The Yorkist Collar of Suns and Roses, significantly 
characteristic of the rival House of the Plantagenets, has not 
left so many examples as there exist of the Collar of SS. In 
the chancel of Aston Church, near Birmingham, are two 
Effigies, both 'finely sculptured in alabaster, and resting within 
a yard or two of each other upon raised tombs. The figures 
are those of knights, and their armour is such as two brothers 
might have worn when Edward IV. fought his way to the 
throne. In life, these knights were certainly Contemporaries; 
probably they were near neighbours, and possibly near kinsmen 
also : but that they were mortal enemies is clearly indicated 
by the circumstance that one wears the Collar of SS, while the 



YORKIST COLLARS OF SUNS &amp; ROSES 
8c INSTGNTS. or THE GXRTER. 




ORDERS OF KNIGHTHOOD. 339 

Collar of the other is charged with the Suns and Boses of York. 
Long have these 

" Knights been diiBt» 
And their good swords rust :** 

their effigies, however, silently though they repose beneath 
the same consecrated roof that has sheltered them both for four 
centuries, have a tale of English History which they tell 
eloquently enough to every observant student of historical 
Heraldry. 

The Yorkist Collar is formed of euns and roses^ which are 
set, like the SS letters, upon a ribbon, or sometimes they are 
either linked together with chains, or placed in immediate con- 
tact The while lion Badge is generally attached to the Collar, 
and forms a pendant from it. The Collar of the Yorkist Knight 
at Aston is represented in No. 586, PI. XLIV. From amongst 
other examples in sculptured effigies I select for particular notice 
the Collars of Sir Bobert Haroourt, KO., a.d. 1471, at Stanton 
Harcourt, Oxfordshire, No. 291 ; of one of the Nevilles and his 
Lady — ^probably Ralph Neville, second Earl of Westmorland, 
who died in 1484, and one of his two Countesses, at Branspeth, 
Durham, No. 687 ; of the Countess of William Fitz-Alan, Earl 
of Arundel, a.d. 1487, at Arundel, No. 688, PI. XLIV. ; and of 
Sir John and Lady Crosby, a.d. 1476, at Great St Helen's 
Church, London. In the Collar of the Countess of Arundel, the 
Suns and Roses are linked together with clusters of oak-leaves — a 
Badge of the Fitz- Alans. Ralph Neville has his Collar formed 
of Boses em Soleily with a whiie hoar, the Badge of Richard m., 
as the pendant ; and his Countess has both the suns and roses, 
with a pendent jewel. The Yorkist Collar is also introduced 
into the Brasses to Henry Bourchier, K.G., Earl of Essex, and his 
Countess, a.d. 1483, at Little Easton, Essex, No. 689, PL XLIV. ; 
to Sir Anthony Grey, at St. Alban's ; and to Rooer Del Bothe, 
Esquire, a.d. 1467, at Sawley, in Derbyshire. 

z 2 



340 ORDERS OF KNIOHTHOOn. 

7. The Most Noble: Ordkr of the Garter, the first, the 
most renowned, and the most honoured of the Orders of Euro- 
pean Knighthood, was instituted hy Edward III. ahont the 
year 1350. The exact occasion and period of its institution, 
and the a&gt;ctual circumstances that attended the foundation of 
the Order cannot now be traced out with precision and certainty. 
That the Order was in existence in the middle of the fourteenth 
century, cannot be questioned. It is equally beyond dispute, 
that the Order from the first has borne the same title, has 
mmibered twenty-five Knights, including the Prince of Wales, 
the Sovereign being the twenty-sixth, and that it has ever re- 
tained its illustrious reputation. Whatever else might be wanted 
to complete the details of the early History of the Order of the 
Qarter, has been provided by such Legends as are certain to be- 
come popular Traditions. See Archceologia, xxxi., 104. 

The original statutes of the Order have undei^one continual 
changes; but none of these changes have affected the funda- 
mental character of the Institution itself. By a Statute of 
Jan. 17th, 1805, it was ordained that the Order should consist 
of the Sovereign, and twenty-five Knights Companions, always 
including in their number the Prince of Wales, together also 
with such lineal descendants of George III. as might be elected 
from time to time. Special Statutes have since been adopted for 
the .admission of Sovereigns and extra Knights, the latter of 
whom have, however, always been incorporated into the number 
of the " Companions " on the occasion of vacancies. 

The Stdlh of the Knights of the Garter are in the Chapel of 
St. George, at Windsor. There their Qtall-Plates are chaiged 
with their arms, and overhead are displayed their Banners. The 
Stall-Plates (369 in number in the year 1757) now at Windsor, 
were evidently emblazoned and fixed in the time of Henry VI. ; 
their Helms alone would determine the period; and they are 
amongst the most valuable and interesting of our national 
heraldic records. See Chap. XXXI IT. 




PLATE LIV. Chapter xx,, p. 341. 

Insigpiia of the Order of the Garter. 

Nob. 590a., 590d., 590b., 590c., and 590.— The Star, the Lesser George, Uie CuUar 

and the George, and the Garter of the Onler, 



ORDERS OF KNIGHTHOOD. 341 

These most valuable and interesting Garter-Plates are offi- 
cially under the guardianship and care of Gabteb Eino of Abms ; 
and all that can be desired on their behalf is, that they always 
may find such a guardian and protector as they now possess in 
Sir Charles QBOBaE Young. See Archceologia^ xxxi., 164. 

The Insignia of ^ Order are the Charier and MoUo^ the Slar^ 
the BQihon and Badge^ and the Cottar with the Oeorge ; and the 
costume consists o^ the Surcoat, Hat, and Mantle. See Plate 
LIV, 

The Garter, No. 590, PI. LIV., charged with ihe MoUo " Honi 
soiT QUI MAL T PEN8E," in letters of gold, with golden borders, 
buckle and pendant, was originally of light blue, but now (as 
it has been since the commencement of the reign of George I.) 
it is dark blue. It is worn on the left leg below the knee, 
Nos. 288 A, and 591 a, PI. XLIII., and No. 290, PI. XLIV. ; but 
by Her Majesty the Queen, the Sovereign of the Order, the 
Garter is worn on the left arm above the elbow, as in No. 292, 
PI. XLIV. 

The Miande is of blue velvet, lined with white taffeta. It has 
the Badge upon the left shoulder, and is &amp;stened with a rich 
cordon and tassels. 

The Hood and the Surcoai are of crimson velvet, the latter 
being lined like the Mantle. 

The Hat is of black velvet, lined with white taffeta. It is 
decorated with a lofty plume of white Ostrich Feathers, in the 
centre of which is a tuft of black Heron's Feathers, the wholu 
being attached to the Hat by a clasp of Diamonds. 

The Badge is circular, and is formed of a buckled Garter, witli 
the Motto, enclosing the Cross of St George on white enamel ; 
Nos, 591, 592, PL XLHI. 

The Star is the Badge irradiated with eight rays, first ordered 
by Charles I. The rays are of silver, or diamonds. The Star 
is worn on the left breast; No. 590 a, PL XLIII. 

The Collar and the George were added to the Insignia by 



342 ORDERS OF KNIGHTBOOD. 

Henry VII. The CoUar is of gold, weighing thirty-six ounoes, 
and consists of twenty-six pieces, alternately bnckled garters, 
and interlaced knots of cords. The garters encircle alternately 
a red rose charged with a white one, and a white rose charged 
with a red one ; No. 690 b, PL XLIV. 

The Oeorge^ executed in coloured enamel, is a figure of St. 
Qeorge on his charger, in the act of piercing the dragon with 
his lance. It forms a Pendant to the Collar; No. 590 o. A 
second Oecrge^ distinguished as the •' Lesser George," has the same 
device of gold, charged upon an enamelled ground, and encircled 
by a buckled Garter, the whole forming an oval; No. 590 d. 
This George is worn depending from the Bibhon of the Order. 
It appears originally to have been black, but Queen Elizabeth 
changed the Eibbon to a light ,blue, and by George 1. it was 
again changed to the dark blue, of which hue it still continues. 
The Ribbon passes over the left shoulder, and crosses the figure 
both in front and behind. 

The Bibbon with its George are now commonly worn by 
Knights of the Garter as accessories of their ordinary costume ; 
the Star and the Garter are also added in evening dress. 

The' Officers of the Order are 

The Prelate, always the Bishop of Winchester. 

The ChanceUor, now the Bishop of Oxford. 

(The First Chancellor of the Order was Bichard Beauchamp, 
Bishop of Salisbury, to whom and to his successors in that See 
the Chancellorship was granted by a Charter of Edward IY, 
From the year 1534 till 1671, the dignity was in the hands of 
laymen ; but it was recovered from Charles II. for the See of 
Salisbury by Bishop Ward. In 1836, Berkshire, in which St 
George's Chapel is situated, was attached to the Diocese of 
Oxford, when the Chancellorship of the Garter passed to the 
Bishops of that See.) 

Both the Prelate and the Chancellor wear their own proper 
Badge of the Order attached to a blue Hibbon, with their epis- 



ORDERS OF KNIGHTHOOD. 313 

copal robes : the Badge of the Prelate is St. George on horse- 
back killing the dragon, of gold enamelled, encompassed by the 
Garter, and ensigned by an episcopal mitre : and the Badge of 
the Chancellor is a red rose enamelled in gold, having on the 
reverse the Anns of St. George, and on both sides encircled by 
the Garter. In the time of Edward YI. the Badge of the Chan- 
cellor was a Cross of the Order, with a red rose charged npon 
a white one of gold, and encompassed with a garland of red and 
white roses. 

The other Officers of the Order are, 

llie Registrar : the Dean of Windsor. His Badge is of gold, 
with a representation of the Register of the Order enamelled in 
crimson, relieved with gold, charged with two gold pens in Sal- 
tire enamelled proper, the whole surmounted with a Crown, over 
a small compartment with the letters G. E. UI. 

The Herald : Garter King of Arms. His Badge is uf gold, 
having on both sides the Arms of St George impaled with those 
of the Sovereign, encircled with the Garter, the whole en- 
amelled, and ensigned witli the Imperial Crown. 

And, the Usher of the Black Bod, 

Knights of the Garter place after their names the Initials 
K. G., which take precedence of all other titles. On the death 
of any ELnight, the Insignia which he had worn are returned by 
his nearest representative to the Sovereign ; a usage which has 
prevailed since the time of Charles II. 

Several fine examples of the monumental Effigies of ELnights 
of the Garter have been preserved ; but it is singular that the 
Effigies of Edward III. himself, and his eldest Son, the Black 
Prince, are without any of the Insignia of their famous Order ; 
in his Will also the Black Prince takes no notice whatever of 
the Order of the Garter. The effigies of Sir William Fitz- 
Waren, K.G., A.D. 1363, at Wantage, and of Sir Richard Pem- 
BRiDGE, K.G., about 1380, in the nave of Hereford Cathedral, are 
memorials of Knights Founders of the Order. Other fine sculp- 



844 ORDERS OF KNIGHTHOOD. 

tared Effigies are those of Richard Beauchahp, K.G., Earl of 
Warwick, 1439, at Warwick; of Sir William Phillip, K.G., 
styled Lord Bardolf, 1441, at Hoveringliam, Notts; of John 
Beaufort, K.G., 1444, at Wimbome Minster, Dorsetshire; of 
John Talbot, K.G., the great Earl of Shrewsbury, 1453, at 
Whitchuroh, Salop; of Sir Eobert Haroourt, K.G. (who also 
wears the Torkist Collar,) 1471, at StantoD Harcoiirt; of John 
De la Pole, K.G., Duke of Suffolk, 1491, at Wingfield ; and of 
Sir Giles Daubeney, K.G., in Westminster Abbey, a.d. 1507. 
The Enight last named is represented, sculptored in alabaster, 
(the alabaster still retains much of its original colonring,) with 
the Garter, Ck)lkr, George, Mantle and Badge of the Order, worn 
over his armonr ; and on the pommel of his sword-hilt he has a 
small shield of Daubeney — gu,^ four fusUa conjoined in feme org. 
The Effigy of Sir William Phillip also is a very noble work, and 
I mnst particularly notice the adjustment of the Gkoter about the 
leg, which is admirably shown : this Knight shews his alliance 
with the House of Lancaster by wearing the CoUar of SS. 
There also are Brasses to Sir S. de Felbryge, E.G., a.d. 1416 ; to 
Lord Gamoys, K.G., (*' Strenuus miles de gartero^^) a.d. 1424 ; to 
the Earl of Essex, K.G., 1483, Ko. 591 a, PL XLHI. ; and to 
Sir T. Boleyn, K.G., a.d. 1538, at Hever, who is habited over his 
armour in the full insignia of the Order. No. 290, PL XLIV., 
represents the adjustment of the Garter about the leg of the 
effigy of the Duke of Suffolk ; and No. 288 a, PL XLIIL, is 
the Garter of Lord Camoys. 

In the middle ages, the Ladies of Knights were occasionally 
associated with the Order of the Garter, but before the close of 
the sixteenth century, this singular association fell into disuse. 
The effigies of Lady Haroourt, the wife of Sir Robert Har- 
couRT, K.G., and of the Duchess of Suffolk, at Euelme in 
Oxfordshire, have the Garter; the former lady wears it upon 
her left arm, No. 292, PL XLIV., and the latter adjusts it about 
her wrist after the manner of a bracelet. 




,„„ , ,. Chapteb XX., p. 345. 

PLATE LV. 

Insignia of the Order of the Thistle. 
Nob. 503. 593n . 593a.. and 593G.-T/ie Star, the Badge.the Cothrand tlw Jettel 

of the Order. 



ordisbs of knighthood. 345 

8. The Most Noble and Most Ancient Order of the Thistle, 
of ScoUand. 

This Order is supposed to have been originally instituted at 
an early period of Scottish Histoiy.'^ It now exists in conformity 
with the Statutes of James XL and Queen Anne, the latter dated 
1703, By a subsequent statute of the year 1827, the order con- 
sists of the Sovereign and sixteen Knights, 

The Star of this Order, worn on the left side, is formed of a 
St. Andrew's Gross of silver, with rays issuing from between 
the points so as to form a lozenge ; in the centre, upon a field of 
gold, is a Thistle proper, surrounded by a circle of green enamel, 
charged with the Motto in golden letters ; No. 593, PL LY. 

The CoUcWy of gold, consists of sixteen Thistles, alternating 
with as many sprigs of Bue, four in each group, interlaced, all 
enamelled proper ; No. 593 a, PI. LV. 

The Jewd or Badge, attached to the Collar, or worn depending 
from a broad dark green Ribbon which crosses the left shoulder, 
is formed of a Figure of St. Andrew of gold enamelled, his sur- 
coat purpure, and his mantle vert, bearing before him his own 
Cross Saltire, the whole being irradiated with golden rays, and 
surrounded by an oval bearing the Motto, **Nemo he impune 
LACE83IT ;" No. 593 B, PL LV. The Jewel is also worn as in 
No. 593 0. 

The Order is indicated by the Initials E.T. The Insignia are 
returned to the Sovereign on the decease of a Knight. 

The Officers of the Order are the Dean, the Jx)rd Lion King of 
Arms, and the Oentleman Usher of the Oreen Bod, 

9. The Most Illustrious Order of St, Patrick, of Ireland, 
instituted by George III., Feb. 5, 1783, now consists of the 
Sovereign, the Orand Master, and twenty-ttoo Knights, By the original 
Statutes the number of Knights was fifteen, and the Lord-Lieu- 
tenant was Orand Master. See Chap. XXXIII. 

The Insignia are. 

The Mantle, made of rich sky-blue tabinet, lined with white 



346 ORDEBS OF iOaOHTHOOD. 

(Silk, and fastened by a cordon of bluo silk and gold with tassels. 
On the right shoulder is the Hood^ of the same materials as the 
Mantle, and on the left side is the Star. 

The Bil^xm^ of sky-bine, four inches in width, is worn over 
the right shoulder, and sustains the Badge when the Collar is 
not worn. 

The CoUaTy of gold, is composed of Boses alternating with 
Hai-ps, tied together with knots of gold, the Koses being en- 
amelled alternately white within red, and red within white, and 
in the centre is an Imperial Crown surmounting a Harp of gold, 
from which the Badge is suspended ; No. 594, PL L VI. 

The Badge or e/eioeZ, of gold, is oval in form. It is surrounded 
with a Wreath of Shamrock, proper, on a gold field; within 
this is a band of sky-blue enamel, charged with the M(Mo in 
golden letters ; and within this band the Croaa of St, Patrick, 
No. 61, surmounted by a Trefoil or Shamrock vert, having 
upon each of its Leaves an Imperial Crown. The field of the 
Cross is either argent, or pierced and left open; No. 594b, 
ri. LVI. 

llie Motto is " Quia Sepababit, mdcclxxxiii." 

The SUxr^ worn on the left side, differs from the Badge only 
in being circular in form instead of oval, and in substituting for 
the exterior wreath of Shamrocks, eight rays of silver, four of 
which are lai^er than the othisr four ; No. 594 a, PI. LYI. 

The Order is indicated by the initials, K.P. 

The Officers of the Order are. 

The FrelaJtey the Archbishop of ArmagL 

The Chancellor^ the Archbishap of Dublin. 

The Begistrar, the Dean of St Patrick's. 

The Genealogist. The Usher of the Black Bod. 

The Ulster King of Arms. Two Heralds^ and Four Pursuivants. 

10. The Most Honoubable Obder of the Bath. 

Amongst the various Bites and Ceremonies attending the 




PLATE LVI. Chaitek xx., p. 34eJ. 

Insignia of the Order of St. Patrick. 
No8. 594a., 594b.. and 594.— 7%« Star, Vie Badge, and the Collar and the Badge 

of tlie Order. 



ORDERS OF KNIGHTHOOD. 317 

ancient admission of Aspirants to the Order of Knighthood, 
one of the most important was the symbolical act of Bathing. 
The memory of this usage is still preserved in the title of the 
renowned Order of the Bath^ though the rite itself has long 
ceased to be administered. The last lingering instances of 
conformity with the primitive observances are recorded to have 
taken place on the occasion of the (!!oronation of Charles II., 
April 23, 1661. From that period till the year 1725, the old 
Institution had fallen into total oblivion ; and accordingly, the 
Order as it now exists, may be said to have been founded by 
George I., May 25, 1725. 

In 1815 the Order was completely remodelled, and it was 
decreed that it should consist of Three Classes ; and in 1847 it 
was further extended, and new statutes for the government of 
the Order were promulgated. The Order was again enlarged on 
the 31st of January, 1859, when it was ordained that the mem- 
bers should be 985 in number. 

The name of Sir Thomas Esturmy, who was created July 17th, 
1204, stands at the head of the chronological Eoll of the Knights. 
The earliest notice of the Badge of the Order being worn is in 
1614: and the present Motto of the Order first occurs upon the 
Badge of Sir Edward Walpolb, created a Knight of the Bath, 
April 23rd, 1661. 

The Order of (he Bath is now composed of, 
I. Knights Grand Gross, (Q.C.B.), who form the "First Class," 
for both naval, military, and diplomatic service. In their 
number, the Sovereign, the Boyal Princes, and certain dis- 
tinguished Foreigners are included ; the ELnights themselves are 
50 Naval and Military, and 25 Civil. 

n. Knights Commanders^ (K.C.B.), also for civil as well as mili- 
tary and naval service. Foreign officers may be admitted as 
honorary K.C.B. All Knights of this *' Second Class" have 
the distinctive appellation of Knighthood, and they wear the 
Insignia of the Order ; their numbers are 102 Naval and Military, 



348 



ORDEBS OF KNIGHTHOOD. 



and 50 Civil ; and it is provided that these numbers may be in- 
creased. 

m. Companiona of tiie Order (C.B.), both civil, naval, and 
military, constitute the " Third Class," and take precedence of 
Esquires, but are not entitled to the style and title of Knight- 
hood; their numbers are 525 Naval and Military, and 200 
Civa 

The Naval and Military Insignia are, 

The CoUar^ of gold, in weight thirty ounces, No. 595, PI. LVII. ; 
it is composed of nine Imperial Crowns, and eight Boses, Thistles, 
and Shamrocks, issuing from a Sceptre, and enamelled proper, 
all linked together with seventeen knots ename^ed ai^ent, and 
having the Badge as a Pendant 

The Star^ worn by the G.C.B., is formed of Rays of Silver, or 




No. 595 A.— Star of Knights G.O.B. 

Jewels, thereon a golden Maltese Cross, charged with the same 
Device as the Badge ; No. 595a. The K.C.B Star omits the Mai. 
tese Cross, and is itself in its form a Cross Pat^o ; No. 595 b. 




PLATE LVII. 



Chapter xx , p, 348. 



Infiignia of the Order op the Bath. 

No6. 595d., 595, and 595c. — The Diplomaiie and Civil Bad^e, (tnd the Collar 

and the Naval and Military Badge of the Order. 



Ik. 






ORDERS OF KNIGHTHOOD. 



349 



The Badge is a gold Cross of eight points, enamelled argent. 
Jn each of the four angles, a Lion of England. In the centre, 
^within a circle, gules, charged with the Motto, the Eose, Thistle, 
and Shamrock, issuing from a Sceptre, and alternating with three 




No. 595 B.-^tar of the Knights K.C.B. 

Imperial Crowns ; the circle is encompassed with two branches 
of Lanrel, which issue from an azure scroll in base, bearing in 
golden letters the words, ** Ice Dien ;" No. 595 c, Plate LVII. 

This Badge is worn by the G.C.B. pendent from a broad 
red Bibhon across the left shoulder, and by the K.C.B. from a 
narrower red Btbhon from the neck ; and by a still narrower 
red Bibhon from the button-hole, llie Cross engraved in PI- 
LVII. is worn by the C.B. as their Badge. 

The Diplomatic and Civil Insignia are. 

The Badge, of gold, an oval, having the external fillet charged 
with the Motto and encircling the central Device of the Order. 
It is worn by the Three Classes with the same distinctions as 
the Military Badge ; but the C.B. Civil Badge is smaller than 
the Badges of the two higher Classes ; No. 595 d, PL LVII. 

The Star of the G.C.B., of silver, has eight rays, and in its 
centre is the red circle with the Motto, enclosing three Imperial 



352 ORDERS OF KNIGHTHOOD. 

oonsifits of the Sovereign, a Orand Master, always to be tlie 
Governor-General of India, and twenty-five KnighU with such 
Honorary EnigUa as the Crown may appoint. The Enighta are 
to include both military, naval, and civil ofiScers, and natives of 
India. See Chap. XXXIII. 

The Insignia are. 

The Collar, No. 596, PL LIX., which is composed of the 
heraldic Bose of England, and the Lotus Flower, and two Palm- 
Branches in saltire tied with a Bibbon, alternately, all of gold 
enamelled proper, and connected by a double golden chain. In 
the centre is the Imperial Crown, from either side of which the 
series of Devices commences with a Lotus. From the Crown 
depends the Badge, consisting of a brilliant Mullet, or Star of 
five Points, to which is suspended an oval Medallion containing 
an onyx cameo profile Bust of the Queen, encircled by the MoUo 
in letters of gold on an enriched Border of light blue enamel ; 
No. 696 A, PI. LIX. 

The InoestmenJt Badge, to be worn pendent from a Bibbon of 
pate blue with white borders, is the same in design as the CoUar 
Badge, but the Star, the setting of the Cameo, and the Motto are 
all of diamonds. 

The Star, of diamonds, is also a mullet, on an irradiated field 
of gold. It is surrounded by an azure fillet, bordered with gold, 
and charged with the Motto in diamofids. The whole is encircled 
by wavy Bays of gold ; No. 596 b, PL LIX. 

The Motto is, " Heaven's Light our Guide.*' 
• 

13. Decorations of Honour. 

Crosses, Medals, and Clasps, with Bithons to which they should 
be attached, have been conferred for signal services, both naval 
and military. These Medals commemorate the services and the 
gallant actions of the Navy and Army of England in all parts of 
the world. Clasps, or small Bars, are attached to the Medal- 
Bibbons, each bearing the name of some paiiicular action. 




PLATE LXI. Chapter xx.. p. 352. 

Insignia of the Okdkr of the Star of India. 

Nos. 596b., 596, 596a.— 7^ Star, the CoUar and ihe Badge of the Order. 



ORDERS OF KNIGHTHOOD. 863 

The Waterloo Medal, now rarely to be seen, is of silver, with 
the Head of the Prince Regent, and a winged Victory, and the 
words, " Waterloo," " Wellington." The Ribbon is crimson, 
with a narrow stripe of blue near each edge. 

The Crimean Medal is silver, and is worn from a blue Ribbon 
with yellow edges for the Crimea itself, and from a yellow 
Ribbon with blue edges for the Baltic. There are separate Clasps 
for Sevastopol, Balaclava, Inkerman, and Alma, 

In 1830 and 1831, " Good Service Medals'' of silver were 
instituted, and Rules were framed for their distribution to 
meritorious soldiers, seamen, and marines. The Naval Medal 
is worn from a blue, and the Military from a crimson Ribbon. 

There are many other Medals for various services in the 
Peninsula, in India, &amp;o. &amp;o. 

The Name, Rank, and Regiment or Ship, of every recipient of 
a Medal is engraven upon it. 

14. The Victoria Cross, instituted by Her Majesty the Queen 
in 1856, is the decoration of eminent personal valour in actual 
conflict with the enemy. It is a Maltese Cross of bronze, charged 
with the Imperial Crown and Crest, and has the words " for 
VALOUR " upon a scroll, No. 697, PI. XLVI. This Cross is worn 
on the left breast attached to a blue Ribbon for the Navy, and to 
a red Ribbon for the Army. A Bar is attached to the ribbon 
for every act of such gallantry as would have won the Cross. 
This noble decoration is given only for ** conspicuous bravery," 
without any distinction whatever of rank or other circum- 
stances. In the collection of Pictures entitled the " Victoria 
Cross Gallery," painted by Mr. Desanges, the incidents — 
memorable in English History, which have been rewarded 
with Victoria Crosses, are set forth with vivid and graphic 
effect. 

15. Foreign Orders and Medals. 

The Insignia of Foreign Orders of Knighthood and Medals of 
Honour, the gift of Foreign Sovereigns, cannot be accepted and 

2 A 



854 DBOOBATIONS OF HONOUB. 

worn by any British subject, without the express and especial 
sanction and authority of the Queen. 

The Foreign Insignia and Medals that of late years have been 
bestowed in considerable numbers upon British officers, soldiers, 
seamen, and marines, are those of the Legion ofSonour of France, 
and the French Military MedaL ; the Sardinian War Medal, and 
the Order of the Medjidie of Turkey, 

16. The Lhqion of Honour comprehends " Grand Crosses," 
** Grand Officers," " Commanders," " Officers," and " Knights." 

The Decoration is a Cross of ten Points of white enamel edged 
with gold; the Points are connected by a Wreath of Laurel 
proper, and in the centre, within an azure circle charged with 
the words, " Napoleon III., Emp. des FRANgAis," is a Head of 
the Emperor. The Cross is ensigned by the Imperial Crown of 
France, and is worn attached to a red Eibbon. The Grand 
Officers also wear upon the right breast a silver Star, charged 
with the Imperial Eagle. The same Star is worn on the left 
breast by the Knights Grand Cross, and their Cross is air 
tached to a broad red Eibbon which passes over their right 
shoulder. 

The French Military Medal is worn from a yellow Bibbon with 
green Borders. 

17. The Sardinian War Medal is charged with the Cross of 
Savoy, and is suspended from a sky-blue Bibbon. 

18. The TurJdeh Order of the Medjidie has five Classes. The 
Badge is a silver Sun of seven triple Bays, the Device of the 
Crescent and Star alternating with the Bays. In the centre, 
upon a circle of red enamel, is the Legend, (in the vernacular), 
•* Zeal, Honour, Loyalty," and the date 1862, (Turkish, 1268); 
within this, on a golden field, the name of the Sultan. This 
Decoration varies in size for the various ** Classes " of the Order. 
The First three Classes suspend the Badge round the neck from 
a red Bibbon having green Borders ; and the Fourth and Fifth 
Classes wear it upon the left Breast by a similar Bibbon. 



FOREIGN ORDERS OF KNIGHTHOOD. 355 

A /SW, closely resembling the Badge, is also worn by the 
First Class on the left, and by the Second Class on the right 
breast 

19. The Austrian and Spanish Order of the GtOlden Fleece, 
having numbered many Englishmen amongst its Members, 
claims a brief notice in this place. Established in the year 1429 
by Philip the Good, Duke of Burgundy, the Order received its 
statutes in 1431.; and on the marriage of Mary, daughter of 
Charles the Bold of Burgundy, with Maximilian of Austria, it 
became an Austrian in place of a Burgundian Order. Since the 
year 1748, this celebrated Order has been claimed, and its pri- 
vileges have been exercised by both Austria and Spain. The 
original motto, '* Autre n'auray,'' declaring that a Knight of 
the Golden Fleece would accept no other knightly distinction, 
shows the high estimation in which this Order was held from 
the time of its foundation. The decoration of the Oclden Fleece 
itself is worn suspended ^m a red ribibon, or from a splendid 
eciUar composed of steels and flints represented as in the act of 
emitting sparks of fire. 

20. The Danish Orders of the Dannedrog and the Whtte 
Elephant, the latter eminently distinguished throughout Europe, 
are now regarded with peculiar interest in England. 

The Order of the Dannebrog, or " the Banner of (he Danes^'' 
was originally founded, a.d. 1219, by Waldemar II., to comme- 
morate his having received from heaven a red banner charged 
with a white cross, while fighting with tiie pagans of Esthonia. 
The Cross of this Order is pai^^ enamelled white with red edges, 
surmounted by the King's cypher crowned, and having within 
each angle a Boyal Crown. In front of the Cross, at the centre, 
is a crowned W, the initial of Waldemar ; and at its extremities 
the words, Qud og Kongen, ** CM and (he King.*^ On the re- 
verse are the three dates of the foundation of the Order, its re- 
newal and reform, 1219, 1671, 1808. The Collar is formed of 
the letter W and the Cross alternately, linked together with 

2 A 2 



866 FOREIGN 0RDEB8 OF KNIGHTHOOD. 

ohains of gold. This Order has four Classes: — Ora/nd Com- 
manders^ Grand Crosses^ Commanders, and Knighta. 

The Oadeb of the White Elephant, said to have been founded 
early in the fifteenth century, was renewed in 1458 by Chris- 
tian I., and by him ordained to consist of thirty knights in 
addition to the Princes of the Boyal Family. The Badge is an 
Elephant of white enamel with golden tusks, having a castle on 
its back. It is worn firom a broad sky-blue watered ribbon, pass- 
ing over the right shoulder, or from a coUar formed of white 
elephants and castles. The Star, of eight points of brilliants, 
has its centre charged with the Danish Cross within a wreath of 
laurel in enamel. 




No. 627.-— White Hart lodged. Badge of Richabd II., firom hia EfRgy 
at Wefitminflter. See page 263. 




No. 298. — Grown of Hebald Kinqs-of-Abms. 



CHAPTER XXI. 

OFFICIAL AND OORPORATE HEBALDRT. 

At an early period in the History of Heraldry, Shields of Arms 
were assigned to certain Officers^ and also to Ccrj^ale Bodies 
whether Civil or Ecclesiastical. Armorial Insignia of this Class 
possess many qualities and associations, which render them 
peculiarly attractive to students of Heraldry. So numerous are 
the Arms that would be comprehended under this Class, that 
within the limits of a general Handbook it is not possible to 
describe and blazon more than a very few illustrative examples. 
A tolerably complete Manual of Official and Corporate Heraldry 
would form a goodly volume in itself. 

1. Arms of the Abchbishops and Bishops, and of their several 
Sebs. The Arms are the Insignia of the Sees, and each Prelate 
impales the arms of his own See on the dexter side, with his 
own paternal arms on the sinister side. 

1. Archbishops. 

Canterburt: Az., an archiepiacopal staff, in pale, or, ensigned 
toiA a cross paiSe org., surmounted by a paU of the last, fimbriated 
and fringed gold, and charged with four crosses formees fitchees sa. 
No. 255, PL XIV. 



358 OFFICIAL AND OORFORATE HERALDRY. 

Fine examples exist at Ganterbaiy, Croydon, Guilford, and 
All Souls College, Oxford. 

York : Ou., two keys in aaUire org,, in chief an Imperial Crvwn 
of England. The arms of the See of York were originally the 
same as those of Canterbury. The change was made about 
A.D. 1540. 

Armagh : Az.j an archiq^iscopal staff, in pale, org,, ensigned with 
a cross patSe or, surmounted by a paU of the second, fimbriated and 
fringed gold, and charged with four crosses f armies fiichees sa, 

DuBUN : The same as Armagh. The student will observe the 
difference between the arms of the See of Canterbury and those 
of Armagh and Dublin. 

2. Bishops. 

London, Durham, Winchester; see p. 96. 
Banoor : Qu,, a hend or, gutt^e-de-poix, between two muUets org,, 
pierced of thefidd. 

Bath and Wells ; Az., a saUire quarterly quartered or and org, 
Carlisle : Arg,, on a cross sa,, a mitre labelled or, 
Chester : Ou,, three mitres, two and one, labelled or, 
Chichester : upon a shield azure a seated Figure, represented 
as in*the act of benediction, and having a sword proceeding out 
of his mouth. This Figure without doubt is that of the Saviour, 
and ihe sword has direct reference to the passages in the Book 
of Bevelation, Chap, i., 16, and xix., 15 and 21. The blazon 
given in the Peerages, which I do not profess to comprehend, is 
as follows : az,, a Prester John sitting upon a tombstone, in his left 
hand a mound, his right extended, all or ; on his head a linen mitre 
and in his mouth a sword ppr. This mysterious sentence must 
have been the result of a strange misapprehension ; possibly the 
figure may have been considered to be that of St. John the 
Evangelist, *' the Elder." See Notes and Queries, 2nd Series, 
iv., 376, for a notice of a Prester John, who certainly has no con- 
nection with the See of Chichester. 



OFFICIAL AUB OORFORATE HEBALDRT. 859 

Ely : Ou.y three crowns, two and one^ or. 

Exeter : Ga., a 9word, in pale, ppr,, hiU or, turmounting two 
keys, tfi saliire, gold. 

Gloucester and Bristol : Az., two keys, in saUire, or, for Glou- 
cester ; impaling, So,, three open crowns, in pale, or, for Bristol. 

Hereford : Gu., three leopard^s faces reversed, jessani de4ys, or. 

Lichfield : Fer pale gu. and arg., a cross potent and quadrate, 
(No. 91), between four crosses paths, aU counterchanged. 

Lincoln : Qu.j tioo lions of England ; on a chief az., ihe Blessed 
Virgin, sitting, crowned and scepired, and holding the Holy Child, or. 

Llandaff : 8a., two pastoral staves, in saUire, or and org. ; ona 
chief az,, three mitres labelled geld. 

Manchester x Or, on a pale engrailed gu., three mitres labelled 
gold ; on a canton of ihe second, (hree hendlets enhanced org. 

Norwich : Az., three mitres labelled, two and one, or. 

Oxford : 8a., a fesse org. ; in chief, three lady's heads, issi^ant 
arrayed and veiled, arg., crowned or ; in base, an ox of the second, 
passant over afordppr. 

Peterborough : Qu., between four crossUts fitchSes, t^)o keys, in 
saUire, or. 

RiPON : Arg., on a saUire gu., two keys, in saUire, wards towards the 
base, or ; ona chief of the second, an Agnus Dei. 

Rochester : Arg., on a saUire gu., an escaUop-sheU or. 

St. Asaph : 8a., two keys, in saUire, addorsed arg, 

Sr. David's : 8a., on a cross or, five cinguefoils of the first. 

Salisbury : Az., the Blessed Virgin and Child, in her left hand a 
sceptre, or. 

Worcester : Arg., ten torteaux, 4, 3, 2, 1. 

For the arms of the Sees of Ireland and of the Colonies, I must 
refer to the Peerages. 

3. Deans and Chapters. 

Of this group of arms I must be content to give four examples 
as specimens of their class. 



860 OFFIGUL AND OOfiPORATE HEBALDRY. 

Deanery of Cantebburt : Az., on a cro88 arg. the letter X aa., 
surmounted by the letter I of the laet. 

Deanery of Yobk : (Tu., ^100 heya, in eaUire addoreed^ arg.^ between 
three pUxteSy two in f esse and one in hase^ in chief a Boyal crown or. 

Deanery of Westmdtsteb : The arms of the Confesaor, No. 78, 
PL I. ; on a chief or,y between two rosea gu., a pale charged widi France 
Modem and England quarterly; No. 598, PL XLYII. 

Deanery of St. Paul's : the arms of the See, having in chief 
the letter D gold. 

4. Monasteries of the Middle Agis. 

Of the ArmB of these Institutions, often of great interest to the 
student of historical Heraldry, I have space for three examples 
only. 

The Abbey of St. Alban : Az., a ecdtire or. No. 633, PI. LXXVII. 
and No. 466, PL LI. 

Westminster Abbey : Az., on a chief indented or^ to the dexter 
a pastoral staff in pale, and to the sinister a mitre gu. ; No. 599, 
PI. XLVn. 

Castle-Acre Priort, Norfolk : Arg,, a cross chequSe or and az,, 
between twelve crosdets fitchies sa. This cross chequ^ indicates 
the close connection that existed between Castle-Acre Priory and 
the £Eunily of the De Warrenneb. 

5. (Jnivebsities and Colleges. 

University of Oxford: Az., on a book open ppr,, garnished 
orj having on (he descter side seven seals gold, (he words Dominus 
Illuminatio Mea, between three croums of (he last ; No. 600, PI. 
XL VII. 

University College, Oxford, (a.d. 872 and 1219) : Az,, a cross 
patonce between four martlets or. 

Baluol College, (a j). 1263 and 1284) : Ou,, an orle arg, 

Merton College, (a.d. 1274) : Or, three chevronels, per pale, (he 



SHIELDS OP J?mMS Sc ROYAIi BitDGES. 



S 7 ^ v^' 








OFFICIAL AND OOBFORATE HERALDRY. 861 

fitii and the third az. and gu., the second cowUerchanging the same 
tinctures. 

Worcester .College, (aj). 1283 and 1713) : Or, two ehewons gu., 
between six martlets sa^ 3, 2, and 1. 

Exeter College, (a.d. 1316 and 1404) : Arg., two heads nefmUe 
Ml., ufithin a hordure of the secondy charged toith eight pairs of keysy 
addorsed and interlaced in the rings^ the wards in chiefs or. 

Oriel College, (a.d. 1323) : England, wUhin a hordure engrailed 
org. 

Queen's College, (a.d. 1340) : Or, three eagles displayed gu. 

New College, (a.d. 1379) : Arg., two chevrons sa.y hetween three 
roses gu., impaling the arms of the See of Winchester, the whole 
within a Garter of the Order ensigned with a Mitre. 

Lincoln College, (a.d. 1429 and 1479): Per pale of three ; 
1. harry of six arg, and az,y in chief three lozenges gu,, for Huou 
Fleming, Bishop of Lincoln, first Founder; 2. on a field arg., the 
arms of the See of Lincoln, ensigned with a mitre; 3. verty three stags 
tripping arg., attired or, for Thomas Scott, Archbishop of York, 
second Founder. 

All Socls College, (a.d. 1437) : Or, a chevron hetween three 
cinquefoUs gu. 

Magdalen College, (aj&gt;. 1456) : Lozengee erm. and sa., on a chief 
of the last three lUies slipped arg. 

Brazen-Nose College, (a.d. 1515): Per pale of three; 1. arg., 
a chevron sa., hetween three roses gu., harbed vert, seeded or, far 
WiLUAM Smith, Bishop of Lincoln, Founder; 2. See of Lincoln; 
8. quarterly, 1 and 4, org., a chevron hetween three hugle-homs stringed 
sa.; 2 and 3, arg., a chevron hetween three crosses-crosdets sa. 

Corpus Christi College, (a.d. 1516) : Per pale of three; 1. az., 
a pelican in its piety or, for Richard Fox, Bishop of Winchester, 
Founder; 2. See of Winchester; 3. sa., a chevron or^ hetween three 
owls arg., on a chief or as many roses gu.j for Bishop Oldham. 

Christ Church College, (a.d. 1532 and 1546) : iSa., on a cross 
engrculed arg., a lion pass, gu., hetween four leopard^s faces az. : on 



862 OFFICIAL AND CORPORATE HERALDRY. 

a chief or, a rote of the thirds barbed vert, seeded of the fifths between 
two Cornish choughs jppr. 

Trinity College: (Founded— the first after the Reformation— 
by Sir Thomas Pope, in 1656) : 

Arms : Per pale or and az,y on a chevron betaeen three griffin's 
heads erased, four fleurs de lys, aU counterchanged. 

Crest : Two griffin^s heads addorsed, issuing from a crest-coronet, 
per pale or and ax., counterchanged, 

St. John's College, (a.d. 1567): Gtt., on a canton erm, a Honed 
rampt. so,; a bordure of the last, charged with eighty estoiles or ; on the 
fesse point an annulet gold, for difference, 

Jesus College, (a.d. 1571) : Az., three stags tripping carg. 

Waduam College, (a.d. 1613) : Ou,, a chevron between three roses 
arg., for Wadham ; impaling, gu,, a bend or, between three escallops 
org., for Petre. 

Pembroke College, (a.d. 1620) : Per pale az, and gu., three lions 
rampt, arg, ; a chief per pale or and arg,, charged with a rose gu, to 
ihe dexter, and to the sinister a thisUe vert. 

University of Cambripoe : Chi,, on a cross erm,, between four 
lions of England, a Bible lying fesse-wise of ihe field, clasped and 
garnished gold, ihe clasps in base; No. 601, PI. XLVII. 

St. Peter's College, Cambridge, (a.d. 1256): Or, ihree 
pallets gu,, within a bordure of the last, charged with eight ducal 
coronets or, 

Clare Hall, (a.d. 1326 ; Foundress, Elizabefh, daughter of 
Earl Gilbert de Clare, and wife of John de Buroh, Earl of 
Ulster) : De Clare impaling Ulster, ihe whole within a bordure sa,, 
gutth d'or, 

Pembroke Hall, (a.d. 1343) ; Foundress, Mary de Chastillon, 
wife of Earl Aymer de Valence) : Be Valence dimidiating ChaS" 
tiUon, — vair, ihree pallets gu,, on a chief or a labd of ihree points az. 

Corpus Christi College, (a.d. 1351): Quarterly, 1 and 4, gu,, a 
pelican in its piety ppr, ; 2 and 3, az,, three lilies arg. 



OFFICIAL AND OORPORATE HERALDRY. 363 

Trinity Hall, (a.d. 1351) : 8a,y wUhin a hardure enffraUed^ a 
crescent erm. 

Queen's College, (a.d. 1441): The Arms of the Foundress, 
Queen Margaret of Anjon, No. 352, Fl. XXIIL : see p. 307. 

Kino's College, (a.d. 1441 ; the Giant of Arms direct from 
King Henry YI., by patent under the Great Seal, aj). 1449), — 
Sb., ihree roses arg.^ barbed vert, seeded or ; on a chief per pale az. and 
gtLj afleur-de-lys and a lion or. 

Catherine Hall, (a.d. 1497) : Ou,, a Catherine-wkeeil or. 

Jesus College, (a.d. 1597) : Arg., on a /esse between three cocVs 
heads erased sa., crested and toattUd gu.,amUre or^aUwUhin a bordure 
of the third J charged with eight ducal coronets gold. 

Christ's College, (a.d. 1505): France Modem and England, 
within a bordure componSe arg. and ax. ; No. 479, Fl. XXXII. 

St. John's College, (a.d. 1508) : No. 479, PI. XXXH. 

Magdalen College, (a.d. 1541): Quarterly, per pale indented or 
and az. : in the 1st and 4th quarters, a bend of the second, frettSe, 
between two martlets, gold ; in the 2nd and Srd quarters, an eagle dis^ 
played of ihe first. 

Trinity College, (a.d. 1546 :) Arg., a chevron between three roses 
gu., barbed vert, seeded or ; on a chief of the second, a Lion of England 
between two Bibles pale-wise gold, damped and garnished of the last, 
dasps to the dexter. 

Gonyille and Caiqs College, (a.d. 1548) : Arg., on a chevron 
between two couple-closes sa., three escallops or, for OonviUe ; impaling 
the arms of OattM, of which the original grant from Dalton, 
Norroy of Arms, runs thus — •* Oolde, semyed withflowre gende, in 
the myddle of the cheyfe sengrene, resting upon the heads of ij serpentes 
in pale, their tayles hnytte together, aUe in proper color, restinge upon 
a square marUe stone vert, belwene their brestes a booh sable, garnished 
gewles, buckles or : betokening by the book Learning ; by the ij 
serpentes uppon the square marble stone Wisdom and Grace, 
founded and stayed upon Yertue's stable stone ; by sengrene 
and flowre gentle Immortalitie that never shall fade, as though 



864 OFFICIAL AND OORPORATE H£BALDRT. 

thus I Bhnlde say, Ex prndentia et literiti, yirtutis petra firmatis, 
immortalitas ; that is to say, By wisdome and learning, graffted | 

in grace and vertne, men come to immortal itie." The impaled | 

arms are within a Bordure camponSe org, and m. | 

Emmanuel College, (a.d. 1584) : Arg,, a lion rampt. az., holding ' 

inhMdexlerpaw a chaplei oflawel vert, in chief (he word Emmanuel 
gold charged upon a ecroll «a. 

Sidney Sussex College (a.d. 1595): Arg.^ a bend engrailed m., 
for Baddiffe ; impaling, or, a pheon az., for Sidney. 

Downing College, (a.d. 1800) : Barry of eigU org. and fferi, a 
griffin segreant or, wiQiin a bordure cu., charged with eight roees of the 
flret, barbed and seeded ppr, 

6. PuBUc Schools. 

Eton College, (aj). 1440) : Az., three lilies, sUpped and leaved^ 
2 and 1, arg, ; on a chief per pale az. and gu., a fleur-de4ys of 
France, and a lion of England. 

Amongst the Archives of Eton is the original Grant of Arms 
by Henbt YL It is one of the most beautiful examples of 
Blazonry that I have ever seen, and it remaios in perfect pre- 
servation. The Seals appended to this and to other documents 
at Eton are of the highest interest 

Winchester School : The same arms as New College, Oxford. 

7. The College of Arms, or Herald's College, London ; and 
the Lton Office of Arms, Edinburgh. 

The College of Arms: — Arms: Arg., a cross of St. George, 
cantoning four dofses, their dexter wings elevated and inverted az. 
No. 602, Chap. XXVH. 

Crest : From a creH-coronet or, a dove rising az. 

Supporters : Two lions rampt. guard, org., ducaUy crowned or. 

These insignia are derived from Wriothsley, one of the early 
Garters. 



CREST, SHIELDS fe VICTORIA CROSS. 




CLARKNCIEITX. 



VLSTEK 




i't^ AIV, 



OFFiaAL AND CORPORATE HERALDRY. 865 

The Heralds' Office, or Lyon Office, of Scotland : Arg.^ a 
lion sejant affroniS gu,^ holding in his dexter paw a thisUe dipped 
vert, and in the sinister an escutcheon of the second ; on a chief az.^ 
the cross sdUire of St. Andrew. These arms date from the year 
1681. 

8. The Herald Eings-of-Arms. 

Oarter : Arg., (he cross of St. Cfeorge ; on a chief aa., a ducal 
coronet encircled wUh a garter of the Order, between a lion of Eng- 
land and afleur-de-lys^aU or. No. 603, PL XLVI. 

NoEROY ; Arg., the Cross of St. George ; on a chief per pale aa. 
and gu., between a fleur'de4ys and a key, the latter pale-wise, a lion 
of England crowned, aU or. No. 604, PL XLVI. 

Clarencieux: Arg., the cross of St. Oeorge; on a chi^ gu.,a 
lion of England, crowned or. No. 606, PL XLVI. 

Lyon : Z%6 Arms of the Lyon Office of Arms. 

Ulster : Arg., ihe cross of St. Oeorge ; on a chief az., between a 
harp and a portcullis, a lion of England, aUor^the harp stringed of 
the first. No. 606, PL XLVI. 

9. Public Institutions. 

The Boyal Society of London: a.d. 1663. Arg., a quarter of 
England. 

The Society of Antiquaries of London: Arg., on a cross of 
St. Charge a Boyal Grown or. Crest: An antique Soman lamp 
or, inflamed ppr. ; with the Motto, above the Crest, *• Non Ex- 

TINOUBTUR." 

10. Municipal and other Corporations. 

London. Arms, No. 139, p. 54 : Arg., the cross of St. Oeorge 
cantoning in the first quarter a sword erect gu. See Sword in 
Chap. IX. 

Crb9T : A dragon^s wing, expanded to the sinister, org., ensigned 
wUh a cross of St. Oeorge. 



866 OFFICIAL AND CORPORATE HERALDRY. 

Supporters: Tuh) dragons vert, ^^eir wings expanded arg.^ and 
each charged mih a cross gu. 

Motto : Domine, Dirioe Nos. 

Examples: Brasses at Standon,. a.d. 1477; Walthamstow, 
A.D. 1545; and Much Hadbam, a.d. 1582: Tlie Guildhall, 
London, &amp;c. 

W£STMiifSTER : Az.y a portcuUis or ; on a chief of the second^ ike 
arms of the Confessor blazoned on a pale, between two roses gu. No. 
607, PI. XL VII. 

Canterbury : Arg,, on a chevron gu.^ between three Cornish choughs 
ppr.y a lion of England. 

York : Arg., on a cross of St. Oeorge, five lioncds of England^ 
(See a Brass in St. Cross Church, York). The Great Seal 
of the City has this Seal between two Ostrich Feathers 
scrolled. 

Oxford : Per fesss org, and barry wavy ax. and of the first, an 
ox passant gu., armed and ungtded or. Or thus, Arg., in base a 
ford of water ppr,, through which an ox gu., armed and unguled or, 
is passing. 

Norwich : Ou,, a casUe triple towered org., and in base a Uon of 



Bristol : Ou., a castle on a mount by the sea-side, a ship under full 
sail passing by, aUppr. See the Brass to John Cutte, Mayor of 
Bristol, A.D. 1575, at Burnet, Somersetshire. 

The Crests, Supporters, and Mottoes, except in the instance 
of London, are omitted, and it must be understood that the 
examples blazoned are simply specimens of their several 
classes. 

The Fraternity of the Trinity House, London ; Incorporated 
by Henry VIII., a.d. 1515. 

Arms : Arg., a cross of 8t, George, between four ships of three 
masts under JuU sail, upon waves of the sea ppr., each bearing an 
ensign and pendant gu. 

Crest : A demi-Uon rampt. guard, regally crowned or, holding in 



r 



OFFICIAL AND OORFORATE HERALDRY. 867 

his dexter paw a sword erect gu., htUed and pomeUed or : No. 168, 
PLXIY. 

11. CoMnfEBciAL Companies and Guilds. 

These important Institutions, the sources from which the 
great stream of English Commerce has flowed onwards with 
ever-increasing strength, take ns back to the grand heraldic 
era of King Edward III., by whom regular Armorial Bearings 
were assigned both to the Associations of Merchants, and to the 
Fraternities of Craftsmen and Traders. And these Coats of 
Arms of the Companies to which they belonged, were quartered* 
in many instances, with their Merchants' Marks^ by enterprising 
individuals, a practice that was regarded with much jealousy by 
the Heralds, inasmuch as thus Merchants' Marks indirectly vin- 
dicated their claim to be regarded as a species of heraldic Bla- 
zonry, and Heraldry itself was constrained to extend its range 
beyond the exclusive limits of Chivalry. 

Many examples of the Arms of the Early Companies or Guilds . 
exist, particularly in Brasses, to which I refer the student. I 
proceed to blazon the arms of the more important of these insti- 
tutions. 

1. The Merchants of the Staple of Calais, incorporated by 
Edward III. : Barry undSe of six org. and az,, on a chief gu^ a 
lion of England, Example : Standon, Herts, a.d. 1477. No. 304, 
PI. XIIL 

2. The Merchants Adventurers, or Hamburgh Merchants, 
received their original Charter from Edward I. : Barry undSe of 
six arg. and az.^ a chief quartered gu, and or ;,in ihe 1st and 4ih 
quarters a lion of England, and in the 2nd and drd quarters two 
Lancastrian roses. Example : The Brass to John Terri, a.d. 1524, 
St John's, Maddermarket, Norwich, which has the arms of the 
Company quartered with the "Mark" of John Terri himself: 
No. 305, PI. XIIL 

3. The East India Merchants, incorporated by Queen Eliza- 



868 OFFICIAL AND OOBPORATE HERALDRY. 

BETH : Az,, three Ships under JvU aaU on (he sea ppr^ their aaiU^ 
enaigns, and pendants aU charged toith the cross of St. Oeorge ; on 
a tMef arg.y between tvoo Lancastrian roses^ a pale quarterly of the 
first and gu., hearing afleur-de-lys of France and a lion of England. 
Example : The Brass to the Navigator, John Eldred, a.d. 1632, 
at Great Saxham, Suffolk. Upon this same Brass are the Arms 
of the Levant and Bussia Merchants' Companies. 

4. The Levant, or Turkey Merchants : Az,, between two rocks, 
a ship wilder fM sail on the sea ppr., the saUSy ensign, and pen- 
dants charged with the cross of St. Oeorge ; a chief engrailed or ; in 
base, a sea-horse, 

6. The EussiA Merchants : Barry waxy of six org, and az. ; 
over aU a ship under fnU saU ppr., the sails, dc, charged wUh 
the cross of St, Oeorge, aU between three bezants ; on a dtief or 
between two Lancastrian roses, a pale gu., bearing a lien of 
England. 

6. The Merchants Adventurers of Bristol: Barry waoy of 
eight arg. and az,, over aU a bend or, charged with a dragon paesant, 
with wings addorsed and tail eoctended, vert ; on a chief gu,, between 
two bezants, a lion of England. 

The Arms of the Twelve Great London Companies or Guilds, 
are as follow : 

1. The Mercers' Company, incorporated a.d. 1394: Ou., a 
demi virgin, couped below the shoulders^ ppr., vested or, crowned 
with an eastern croum, her hair dishevelled, and wreathed about 
her temples with roses of Oie second, issuing from clouds, and aU 
wiOUn an orle of the same, ppr. Example: Higham Ferrers, 
Northants, a.d. 1504. 

2. The Grocers, (ajo. 1346) : Arg,, a chevron gu,, between nine 
cloves sa. Example : Finohley, Middlesex, a.d. 1610. 

3. The Drapers, (a.d. 1332 and 1364; Arms 1439) : Az., three 
clouds, radiated, ppr., each adorned with a triple crown or, cap gu. 
Example: Walthamstow, Essex, a.d. 1543. 

4. The Fishmongers. (The Stock and SaU Fishmongers' ancient 



r 



OFFICIAL AND CORPORATE HERALDRY. 369 

Companies combined, and their separate Aims united on a single 
Shield, A.D. 1534) : Az., three dolphins naiani, in pale^ arg.y finned 
and ducaUy crowned or, between two paire of luciea in aaliire, (the sin. 
surmounting the dext.), aver (he nose of each hey a dtical coronet gold : 
on a chief gu., three pairs of heySy endorsed in saltire, of the last. 
Example: Wobum, Bocks, a.d. 1520. 

5. The Goldsmiths, (a.d. 1327): Quarterly; 1 and 4 gu., a 
leopards face or ; 2 and 3, 02.*, a covered cup, and in chief two 
huckleSy their tongues fesse-wise, points to the dext,^ aU of the second. 
Example : Datchet, Bucks, a.d. 1593. 

6. The Merchant Tailors, (a.d. 1466 and 1503) : Arg., a royal 
teni, between two parUameni robes, gu., lined erm., the tent garnished 
and the tent-staff and pennon all or ; on a chief 02., a lion of England. 
Example : St. Martin Outwich, London, a.d. 1500. 

7. The Skinners, (a.d. 1327 and 1395): Erm., an a chief 
gu., three Prince's coronets, composed of crosses paiSes and fleurs de lys, 
t&gt;r, with caps of the first, and tasseUed of the last. Example : 
Skinners' Hall. 

8. The Haberdashers, (a.d. 1447, Arms in 1571): Barfy 
nebulee of six org, and az., over aU a bend gu., charged with a lion 
of England. Example : St. Andrew Undershaft, London, a.d. 
1571. 

9. The Salters, (a.d. 1364 and 1530, Arms in 1530): Per 
chev. az. and gu., three covered cups, or saU-sprinklers, org. Example : 
All Hallows, Barking, London, c. 1535. 

10. The Ironmongers, (a.d. 1462): Arg.^ on a chevron gu., 
three swivels or, (the central one pale- wise, the other two in (he line of 
the ordinary,) between as many steel gads az. Example: Iron- 
mongers' Hall. 

11. The Yintnebs, (a.d. 1365 and 1437): 8a., a chevron between 
three tuns arg. Example : Vintners' Hall. 

12. The Clothworkers, (a.d. 1482 and 1528, Arms tn 1530): 
Sa., a chevron erm., between two hobichs in chief arg., and a tezd 
dipped in base or. Example : Clothworkers' Hall. 

2 B 



870 OFFICIAL AND CORPORATE HERALDRY. 

To these, as examples of the other Companies of London, 
I add the Blazon of three other Shields of the same class. 

1. The Painters-Stainebs, or Painters: Quarterly; land4,az., 
three shiddB^ 2 and, 1, org,; 2 and 8, oz., a chevron, hettoeen three 
phoenix^ heads erasedy or. Example : Painters' Hall. 

2. The Stationers, (a.d. 1556): Az., an a chevron or, between 
three Biblee lying fesse-wiae gu., garnished, leaved, and clasped gdd, 
(clasps to the ha»e), an eagle rising ))pr., enclosed by two Lancastrian 
roses ; Jrom the chief of the shield, a demi^rde of glory edged with 
clouds ppr,, therein a Dove displayed, about its head a circle arg. 
Example : Brass to John Day, printer, a.d. 1564, Little Bradley, 
Suffolk. 

8. The Brewers : Ou., on a chevron arg,, between three pairs of 
barley garbs, in saUire, or, three tuns sa., hooped of the third. Ex- 
ample : at All Hallows Barking, London, a.d. 1592. 

Arms were also granted, at the following periods, to several 
other Civic Companies ; as, to the Tallow Chandlers, a.d. 1456 ; 
to the Upholders, in 1465 ; to the Carpenters, in 1466 ; to the 
Wax-Chandlers, in 1484; to the Weavers, in 1490; to the 
Coopers, in 1509 ; to the Plasterers, in 1546 ; to the Armoubers, 
in 1556 ; and to the Apothecaries, in 1617. 

Shields of Arms are considered to belong to the different 
Counties of the United Kingdom, and they are habitually used 
in documents and publications having a direct reference to the 
several Counties. It is difficult, however, to understand how a 
County can be supposed either to have a corporate existence, 
or to be able to bear arms. Accordingly, I do not include in 
this chapter the so-called Arms of the Counties~*arms which 
appear to have been adapted from the heraldic insignia of the 
early Earls or Counts. 

In this Chapter, had I been enabled to have extended it as 
fully as I should have desired, I should have included a com- 
plete series of those arms of which I have given only a few 



OFFICIAL AND CORPORATE HERALDRY. 



371 



selected examples ; and I should also have added several other 
groups, that would have comprehended the heraldic insignia of 
the Begiments of the British Army, of our various National 
and Puhlic Institutions and Associations, and of the most im- 
portant of the incorporated Companies of our own times. I 
cannot resist adding the Mottoes of the KotAL Artillery and the 
BoYAL Marines — the former, with the Bojal Arms and a gun, 
have the words Ubique, and Quo Fas et Gloria Ducunt ; and, 
with a representation of the terrestrial glohe, the latter have 
these words— Per Mare, per Terras. 




uo 




mi 



No. 723.— MuNGULDASS NuTHOOBHOY. of Bombay. 
(See the end of Chap. XXIX.) 



2 B 2 




No. 556.— Crown of Henrt VII., King's College Chapel, Cambridge. 
See p. 319. 



CHAPTER XXII. 

ARCHITECTURAL HERALDRY. 

Enqush Ileraldry aud the Gothic Architecture of England arose 
and flourished together, From the first they acted in concert, 
and their allied action has always been productive of the hap- 
piest results. From the edifices that the Qothic of the middle 
ages has left, as its own most fitting memorial, we learn many 
of not the least valuable of our lessons in early Heraldry. And 
it is from a thoughtful study of the manner in which the old 
alliance between Heraldry and Gothic Architecture expressed 
itself in the Architectural Heraldry of the Plantagenet and 
Tudor eras, that we determine both the character and the range 
of our own Architectural Heraldry, in the revived Gothic Archi- 
tecture of the present day. 

Itself essentially an historical Art, Architecture, through the 
agency of other Arts working in close association with it, aspires 
to become a stone-inscribed History. Such co-operation neces- 
sarily implies that every historical accessory should be in con- 



ARCHITECTURAL HERALDRY. 373 

fiistent harmony with the style of Architectiire with which it 
would be associated. Classic Architecture, accordingly, requires 
that every historical allusion should be made through its own 
medium. Whatever Heraldry it may recognize, must be a 
Heraldry that derives its imageiy from classic sources, and em- 
bodies its symbolism in classic guise. Alike in sentiment, in 
feeling, and in expression, the historical element of Classic 
Architecture must be thoroughly classic, and consequently it is 
impossible that any edifices erected in this style should be ren- 
dered historical of England. At any rate, it is not possible to 
write English History upon a classic edifice, with a free and a 
legible hand, or even in English characters, and in keeping with 
English traditions and sussociations. The style peremptorily 
refuses to concede to English History more than a paraphrase 
and a translation after the classic manner. 

On the other hand that Architectural Heraldry which re- 
cords English History with the most consistent and emphatic 
expressiveness, is an element of Gothic Architecture. Without 
it the style is imperfect. It carries out its ideas. It is the 
inexhaustible source of its happiest decorations. By it the 
Oothic realizes the peculiarly historical attributes of its own 
character. And, as the style is itself of universal applicability, 
free in action, and elastic in the development of its principles — 
so also Heraldry provides for the Gothic Architect, (and par- 
ticularly when employed upon public and national works,) the 
most comprehensive and the most plastic of symbolism. Such 
being the case, it is a matter for equal surprise and regret that 
Architectural Heraldiy should hitherto have been so generally 
neglected, even by some of our Gothic Architects. It is to be 
hoped that the time at length has come, in which both Archi- 
tects themselves, and all who feel a real interest in their great 
Art, will bestow at least a portion of their regard upon Heraldry 
in its special relation to Architecture. From medieval Heraldry 
they will find that the Heraldry, which it is for them to intro- 



374 ARCHITECTURAL HERALDRY. 

duce and to incorporate into their Qothic Architecture, must be 
derived. But here, as in the instance of the Architecture itself, 
it is not a blind following, and much less is it a mere inanimate 
reproduction of medissval Heraldry, and a reiteration of its foims 
and usages, that will enable our Architects to render their 
Architecture historical through a Heraldry of its own. What 
they have to do is to study the old Heraldry, to familiarise them- 
selves with its working, to read its records with ease and fluency, 
and to investigate the principles upon which it was carried out 
into action. And having thius become Heralds through having 
attained to a mastery over mediaeval Heraldry, our Architects 
will devote themselves to the development of a fresh application 
of Heraldry in their own Architecture. The medisaval autho- 
rities will have taught our. Architects both what Heraldry is 
able to accomplish, and the right system for its operation ; and 
then with themselves will rest the obligation to produce a 
Heraldry that shall be truly their own, and to associate it with 
the Gothic Architecture of to-day. 

In their treatment of heraldic devices and compositions, I 
assume that our Architects would avoid every early convention- 
alism, which could detract from the artistic excellence of their 
works. Good drawing and truthful expression are in perfect 
keeping with the best and purest Heraldry, as an absolute 
harmony necessarily exists between the noblest of Architecture 
and of Sculpture and Fainting. What I venture to designate 
an archaic system of rendering their figures, certainly does not 
vitiate the Heraldry of the early Heralds: but then their 
Heraldry would have been equally good, had their figures been 
faultless as works of Art. And though we may produce good 
Heraldry without good Art, still our Heraldry will never lose 
anything through an alliance with the most perfect Art; and 
in the instance of our Architectural Heraldry, the very highest 
artistic merit is a positive condition of exceUence. I am aware 
that there exist individuals prepared to maintain that good 



ABCHITBCTUBAL HEBALDBT. 376 

Heraldry implies bad Art To such persons I cannot concede 
any anthority to pronounce an opinion even upon good Heraldry ; 
bnt, in illustration of my own sentiments/ 1 refer them to the 
Supporters of the Boyal Shield of England, as they appear at 
the entrance to Buckingham Palace ; and I ask whether in their 
opinion that Lion and that Unicom would discharge their 
heraldic duties with less complete heraldic efficiency, had they 
been sculptured after drawings by Sir Edwin Landseer, (sup- 
posing that great artist sometimes to be in an heraldic mood,) 
instead of being such outrageous burlesques upon both Art and 
Heraldry as have been permitted to intrude themselves under 
the very eyes of their Sovereign ? 

It is a singular circumstance, the causes of which it is by no 
means necessary now to investigate, that Heraldry is invariably 
felt to be one of the most interesting of studies by those who 
have bestowed some thought upon it, while by almost all who 
are absolutely unacquainted with it it is held to be dry and 
uninviting, if not actually* repulsive. Whatever the feeling 
generally entertained for tbem, tbe peculiar value of heraldic 
devices for purposes of decoration in Gothic Arcbitecture, and 
their happy fiaoility for adaptation to almost every possible 
condition, may justly claim for Architectural Heraldry the 
studious, and therefore the cordial regard of eveiy Gothic 
Architect. Without Heraldzy, historical sculpture in Architec- 
ture must ever act at disadvantage. The two in union enable 
the Architect to work with full powers. For Heraldiy comes 
in readily on innumerable occasions when sculpture, properly so 
called, would be inadmissible. It enriches subordinate archi- 
tectural details with characteristic decoration, by the very 
process which gives to them a meaning ; and thus it inscribes 
those details with an historical record. In the more important 
members of an edifice, also. Heraldry is equally ready to exert 
faculties fully adequate to all that they can require. If it be 
desired to identify an architectural work with a single person or 



376 ARCHITECTURAL HERALDRY. 

with a particular fiaunily, Heraldry knows well how to symbolizo 
with distinctness and precision the solitary impeisonation, or 
the kindred group. Or should the edifice be one directly con- 
nected with the nation, either in some department of the 
Government, or in the administration of some far-off colony or 
dependency — ^Heraldry here is not found wanting; but, in 
union with sculpture, it carries around the entire building its 
historical series of much-conveying symbols; and from base- 
ment to parapet the Architecture is eloquent of the men who 
have taken a part in rendering their country the great and 
honoured England that she is. 

Amongst the practical lessons that Architeots will learn from 
the early Heralds, when they worked with the Architects of 
their own day, are those that will impress upon their minds the 
rule that shields and niches are never to be introduced into 
architectural compositions for their own sake alone, but that 
every shield is to be charged with its proper bearings, and 
every niche is to contain a becoming statue. They will also 
learn that heraldic insignia are always to be introduced with a 
definite puipose ; that each class of devices has certain functions 
peculiar to itself^ and that the skilful architectural Herald 
will always be able to adapt the devices and compositions of 
Heraldry to every condition and circumstance of each particular 
edifice. In the accessories of buildings also, as well as in theii* 
structural decorations, Heraldry is ever ready to provide the 
most felicitous of ornamentation. In Stained Glass, heraldic 
designs, and the heraldic treatment of all designs are of the 
utmost value and the greatest interest. In Tile Pavements, 
Heraldry is equally efficient. The Heraldry of the early tiles 
at Malvern, Gloucester, Worcester, Westminster, and many 
other places, abounds alike in hLstorical information, and in 
practical suggestions. And again, the engraven and inlaid 
stone pavements that have just been revived by Clayton and 
Bell with such happy effect, may derive from Heraldry an 



ABCHITECTURAL HEBALDRT. . 377 

infinite series of always appropriate and grapbio designs. Archi- 
tectural Wood-carvers, in like manner, will find similar advan- 
tages in a close alliance with Heraldry. It is the same with 
architectural Metal-workers, and with every artist and crafts- 
man that the Architect summons to work with him in the 
realization of his compositions : Architectural Heraldry abounds 
with direct teaching and indirect suggestions available alike by 
them all. 

Throughout the Grothic era, the custom^ prevailed to intro- 
duce shields of arms of the Sovereign and the several members 
of his family into the architectaral decorations of the more 
important edifices, and in many instances also the armorial 
insignia of benefactors and persons of eminence at the time 
in the realm. Some relics of this usage remain in all our 
cathedrals, and in almost every early building that still exists. 
The shields were generally placed in the spandrels of some of 
the arcades and arches, in bosses of the vaulting or of the 
timber roofs, or in the stained glass of the vnndows; some- 
times they occur below niches, as on the altar-screen at St. 
Alban's ; and in other instances in various other positions. 

Amongst the most interesting and valuable of the collections 
of early Architectural Heraldry to which I am able to direct 
the attention of the student, are those in the Gathedbai^, and 
especially in the Gloistebs of Ganterbury Cathedral, in West- 
minster Abbey and Hall, St. Alban's Abbey, King's College 
Chapel, Cambridge, and St. George's Chapel, Windsor, and also 
many of the Collegiate Buildings at both Oxford and Cam- 
bridge ; and with them I may associate, as examples of parish 
churches rich in Heraldry, the churches of Great Yarmouth and 
Fotheringhay. 

The Architectural Heraldry of Westminster Abbey commences 
with the series of shields that were sculptured by Edward I., or 
perhaps by Henry III., in the spandrels of the wall arcades of 
the choir aisles. These noble shields have suffered grievously 



878 ABCHITECTURAL HERALDRY. 

from the barbarous mutilations that, from time to time, have 
been permitted to outrage the Church, which stands at the head 
of the ecclesiastical edifices of England. Of the original series 
there still remain, on the south side, the shields of the Confessor, 
Provence, Winchester {De Quincy)^ Lincoln (De Lacy), Corn- 
wall and Essex {Fitz Piers) ; and on the north side, those of 
the Emperor, France, Gloucester {De Clare), Kent (De Burgh), 
De Montfort, and De Warrenne. More towards the west, in 
Henrt V.'s work, there are remains of some other shields 
that are painted (and not sculptured in relief) in the aisle- 
arcades of that portion of the Abbey. There is also a fine early 
shield of the Confessor in the south-west window. Of the rest of 
the Architectural Heraldry of Westminster Abbey, it will be 
sufficient for me to specify the Badges of Henrt V. in his monu- 
ment ; the Stall-Plates of the Knights and Esquires of the Bath 
in Henrt YII.'s Chapel, and various Boyal Badges scattered in 
rich profusion throughout both the exterior and the interior of 
that chapel, together with two fine shields of France Modem and 
England, one without, and the other with a Label, carved beneath 
the dark vaulting that covers the approach to it In West- 
minster Hall, in addition to the remarkable series of Boyal 
Creels amd Badges, and to the fine Skidds at the entrance, shields 
charged with the arms of Richard II. and of the Confessor alter- 
nate upon the corbels, that carry the principal trusses of the 
noble roof. The Bayal Shield of Henrt YII. with its Supporters, 
and the Crown, and also with the Badges of that Prince, are 
sculptured at Kino*s Chapel in a truly splendid style, notwith- 
standing the decided dedine of heraldic art that prevails during 
the period of the Tudors : and the entrance gateway to St. John's 
College in the same University, displays another admirable 
example of Tudor Architectural Heraldry. In concludiug this 
chapter, I again refer students to that treasury of historical 
Heraldry, the collection of StaU-Plales of the Garter at 
Windsor : and I must suggest a visit to the chantries of Abbots 



ABOHIT£GTURAL HERALDRY. 



379 



WuEATHAMSTEDE and Eamrtdge in St. Alban's Abbey, to eta- 
dents who would desire to see with their own eyes how admi- 
rably the Heralds and the Architects of the olden time worked 
t(^ether. The remains of the gate-house also of Eirkham 
Priory in Yorkshire, and the architectural monument of Bishop 
Hadfield at Durham, must be added to the series of structures 
that are specially rich in the Heraldry of Gothic Architecture 
before its fall. 




No. 657.— Shield of Effigy of a Knight of the time of Edward IL, at 
Glehongre, Herefordahire. See Chapter XXX. 




No. 557. — Grown from the Monument of Maroaret, Countess of Richmond, 
A.D. 1509, Westminster Abbey. See pp. 818 and 392. 



CHAPTER XXIII. 

MONUMENTAL HERALDRY. 



As a general mle, the Monuments of the middle ages are 
appropriate, characteristic, and deeply interesting, both as works 
of Art, and as commemorative memorials. In the degree also 
that these early monuments increase in their importance, in that 
same degree do they claim an increased measure of admiring 
approval. On the other hand, in our modem monuments the 
converse of this rule obtaiils ; and particularly in the circum- 
stance that the more important the monument, the more de- 
plorably unworthy it is almost certain to be. The earlier and 
the more recent monuments in Westminster Abbey exemplify 
the two eras in a significant manner. The competitions that 
within the last few years have brought together collections of 
designs for certain public memorials, have been no less conclu- 
sive in demonstrating the fact, that the nobler the required 
monument, the more ignoble is the prevailing character of the 
compositions that are submitted for it. The evidence of the 
Abbey and of the competitions is corroborated in every direc- 
tion by the innumerable objects that act as monuments in our , 



MONUMENTAL HERALDRY. 381 

cemeteries, and by their oontemporaries, the marble pyramids, 
and mnral tablets, and tall white monotonous slabs of our 
churches and churchyards. 

Upon consideration, the early monuments are found to be 
thoroughly heraldic, while it is evident that Heraldry knows 
nothing of those that so clearly indicate the lapse of intervening 
centuries. I believe that to this presence of Monumental 
Heraldry with the memorials of the one era, and to its absence 
from those of the other, may be attributed the painful contrast 
that exists between them ; and 1 am persuaded that tiue 
Monumental Heraldry alone is competent to render the com- 
memorative memorials of our own times worthy to take rank 
with such monuments, as our predecessors of the thirteenth and 
fourteenth centuries were in the habit of erecting. It must be 
added that, as a matter of course, a preliminary step to the 
adoption of a genuine and really effective Monumental Heraldry 
must be the absolute exclusion of the pagan element from our 
Monuments — the exclusion of all mythological allegories and 
emblems, from inverted torches to the semi-nude figures whose 
identity has to be determined by their names being inscribed 
beneath their feet. 

The study of Monumental and of Architectural Heraldry may 
be most advantageously pursued together. Indeed, the one 
study may be said to imply the other ; so that what has been 
said in the preceding chapter upon Architectural Heraldry, is 
equallj^ applicable to the Heraldry of Monuments. The old 
monuments are to be studied as authorities for their Heraldry ; 
but they are not to be copied, neither is their Heraldry to be 
reproduced once more in fac-simile. There is much, for ex- 
ample, that the modem designer of engraven monumental slabs 
may leani from the Brasses of the reign of Bichard II. ; and 
yet who can forbear to smile when he finds a figure of a knight, 
armed and appointed as Bolingbroke and Mowbray were when 
they met for their famous combat, laid down in the yeoT 1861, 



382 MONUMENTAL HERALDRY. 

to commemorate a veteran officer, who had for aome time been 
a metropolitan member of Parliament since the passing of the 
Beform Bill? This is a companion work to the Dr. Johnson in 
a Boman toga. 

Yeiy small is the number of the early monuments that are 
altogether unable to repay the inquiries of the student of 
Heraldry, while fine and eminently instructive examples exist 
in very considerable numbers. The cathedrals and both the 
greater and lesser churches are alike celebrated for their ad- 
mirable monuments. None surpass those of Edmund of Lan- 
caster and his Countess, of the De Valences, of Alianore of 
Castile, of John of Eltham, and of Edward m. and his Queen 
Philippa, in Westminster Abbey. The monuments also of the 
Black Prince, of Henry IV. and his Queen Joanna, and of 
Archbishop Arundel, at Canterbury; of the Beauchamfs, at 
Warwick ; of the Nevilles, at Staindrop ; of Bishop Burghersh 
and his brother, at Lincoln ; of Edward IE., at Gloucester; of 
the Coimtess of Richmond and her son, Henry VIL, at West- 
minster ; of the two Abbots and Duke Humphrey Plantaoenef, 
at St. Alban's, and of Prince Arthur Tudor, at Worcester, are 
inferior to none in heraldic interest. From a long series of 
other examples, which invite the special attention of the student 
of Monumental Heraldzy, I may specify those that are at 
Beverley, Tewkesbury, St. Alban's, Christchurch, Arundel, Win- 
chelsea, Trotton in Sussex, Elsyng in Norfolk, and Cobham in 
Kent 

Whatsoever especial points the student may desire to investi- 
gate, he will find examples that will place before him the 
information that he requires. The earliest known quartering 
of arms appears upon the monument of Alianore of Castile ; and 
very early quartering by a subject is shown in the shield of the 
Earl of Pembroke on the monument of his royal mother-in-law, 
Queen Phiuppa, and also upon the surcoat of the Earl himself 
in the Elsyng Brass, a.d. 1347. The shields of arms with 



MONUBfENTAL HERALDRY. 388 

their accessories upon the Bamrydge monumental chantry at 
St. Albania, are exquisite examples of pure taste, exuberant 
flEincy, and delicate treatment. The shields of the Percy Shrine 
at Beverley exemplify the most effective drawing, the boldest 
sculpture, and diapering equally simple and beautiful. The 
monument to a priest of the same family, also in Beverley 
Minster, illustrates in a remarkable manner the usage of em- 
broidering a series of shields of arms upon ecclesiastical vest- 
ments. The effigy at Worcester, and the Brass at Trotton, are 
examples of a similar application of shields of arms to the deco- 
ration of female costume. And, again,, the Heraldry of dress is 
shown in all its curious and sometimes fantastic varieties in 
almost innumerable brasses and sculptured effigies. A profusion 
of heraldic insignia adorns the monument of Ludovic Bobsart, 
Lord BouRCHiER, Standard, Bearer of Henry V., at Westminster 
Abbey. On either side of this last monument two large banners 
are carved in stone, with quartered arms in relief, iJieir staves 
forming mouldings of the canopy, and being held severally by a 
lion and a falcon, or perhaps an eagle. Other examples might 
be adduced in vast numbers of monuments of every class, 
the simplest as well as the most elaborate and costly, all 
of them competent to bear witness to the justice of the highest 
encomiums that may be bestowed upon early Monumental 
Heraldry. 

n. The Boyal Monuments of England. 

At Fonteoraudy in Normandy, there are original monumental 
effigies of Henry II., Alianore of Guienne, Bichard I., and 
IsA BELLE of AugoulSme. 

At Bauen is a second monumental effigy of Bichard I. 

At the Abbey of L'Espan, near Mans, is a monumental effigy 
of Berengaria of Navarre. 

At Mans is a curious enamelled tablet, supposed to be monu- 
mental, to Geoffrey of Anjou, the Founder of the House of 



384 MONUMENTAL HERALDRY. 

Plant AGEXET. Engraved by Stothard, and again in Labarte's 
Ilandbook. 
The following are in England : — 

1. William Euftjs, died 1100. Winchester Cathedral. Stone 
coffin. 

2. John, died 1216. Worcester Cathedral. Effigy and coffin- 
lid of the period of his death, now on an altar-tomb of about 
A.D. 1500. This is the earliest Eoyal Effigy in England. 

3. Henry III., died 1272. Westminster Abbey. Tomb and 
Effigy, with mosaic work. 

4. Edward I., died 1307. Westminster Abbey. Plain Tomb. 

5. Alianorb of Castile, died 1290. Westminster Abbey. 
Tomb, Effigy, and Canopy. 

6. Edward II., died 1327. Gloucester Cathedral. Tomb, 
Effigy, and Canopy. 

7. Edward III., died 1377. Westminster Abbey. Tomb, 
Effigy, and Canopy. 

8. Philippa of Hainault, died 1369. Westminster Abbey. 
Tomb, Effigy, and Canopy. 

9 and 10. Eichard II., deposed 1399; and Anne of Bohemia, 
died 1394. Westminster Abbey* Tomb, two Effigies, and 
Canopy. ' 

11 and 12. Henry IV., died 1413 ; and Joanna of Navarre, died 
1437. Canterbury Cathedral. Tomb, two Effigies, and Canopy. 

13. Henry V., died 1422. Westminster Abbey. Tomb and 
mutilated Effigy. 

14 and 15. Henry VII., died 1509; and Elizabeth of York, 
died 1503. Westminster Abbey. Tomb, two Effigies and En- 
closure. 

16. Elizabefh, died 1603. Westminster Abbey. Benaissance 
Monument and Effigy. 

To the foregoing the following monuments of Royal Personages 
may be added : — 



MONUMENTAL HERALDRY. 385 

1. William Longesi^e, Earl of Salisbury, died 1226. Salisbury 
Cathedral. Tomb and Effigy. 

2. Edmond Plantagenet, First Earl of Lancaster, (second son 
of Henry III.), died 1296. Westminster Abbey. Tomb, Effigy, 
and Canopy. 

3. Ateune, Countess of Lancaster, died 1269. Westminster 
Abbey. Tomb, Effigy, and Canopy. 

4. William de Valence, Earl of Pembroke, (son of Isabelle 
of Angouleme), died 1296. Westminster Abbey. Tomb and 
Effigy, with rich Enamels. 

5. Aymer de Valence, Earl of Pembroke, (son of Earl Wil- 
liam), died about 1320. Westminster Abbey. Tomb, Effigy, 
and Canopy. 

6. John Plantagenet, of Eltham, Earl of Cornwall, (second 
son of Edward U.), died 1334. Westminster Abbey. Tomb and 
Effigy ; Canopy destroyed. 

7. William Plantagenet, of Hatfield, (second son of Edward 
III.), died about 1340. York Cathedi-al. Tomb and Effigy. 

8. Edward Plantagenet, K.Q., the Black Prince, died 1376. 
Canterbury Cathedral. Tomb, Effigy and Canopy ; also a Shield, 
Helm, &amp;c. 

9. All^ore de Bohun, (widow of Thomas Plantagenet, Duke 
of Gloucester, youngest son of Edward III.), died 1399. West- 
minster Abbey. Tomb and Brass. 

10. Edmond Plantagenet, K.G., Duke of York, (fifth son of 
Edward III.), died 1402. King's Langley, Herts. Tomb and 
Shields of Arms. 

11. HuMniREY Plantagenet, K.G., Duke of Gloucester, (fourth 
son of Henry IV.), died 1447. St. Alban's Abbey. Architectural 
and Heraldic Monument. 

12. Catherine, (third wife of Prince John Plantagenet of 
Ghent), died 1403. Lincoln Cathedral. Tomb, now despoiled 
of its Brasses. 

13. Isabelle Plantagenet, (only daughter of Eichard Plan- 

2 c 



386 MONUMENTAL HERALDRY. 

tegenet, of Coningsburgh), and her husband, Henry Bourchier, 
E.G., Earl of Essex and En, died 1400. Little Easton, Essex. 
Brass with two Effigies. 

14. Elizabeth Plantagenet, (sister of Edward IV.), and her 
husband, John de la Pole, E.G., Duke of Suffolk, died, 1400. 
Wingfield, Suffolk. Tomb, with two Effigies. 

15. Arthur Tudor, K.G., Prince of Wales, (eldest son of 
Henry VII.), died 1602. Worcester Cathedral. Architectural 
and Heraldic Monument 

16. Margaret Douglas, Countess of Lennox, (mother of Lord 
Damley, and grand-daughter of Henry VII.), died 1577. West- 
minster Abbey. Tomb and Effigy. 

17. Margaref Beaufort, Countess of Richmond, (mother of 
Henry VII.), died 1509. Westminster Abbey. Tomb and 
Effigy. 

18. Margaret Plantagenet, Countess of Salisbury, (daughter 
of George Plantagenet, Duke of Clarence), died 1541. Christ 
Church, Hampshire. Architectural Monument. 

19. Mary Stuart, Queen of Scots, died 1587. Westminster 
Abbey. Eenaissance Monument and Effigy. 

Amongst the Crystal Palace Collections there are casts of all 
the Boyal effigies, including those at Fonteyraud, Bonen and 
Mans, except the mutilated No. 13 of the former of the fore- 
going lists; and also casts of Nos. 1, 6, 8, 17, and 19, in the 
second list. 

The early usage of placing various shields of arms upon monu- 
ments leads naturally to inquiries into the rules, if any ever 
existed, by which the selection of such shields might have been 
determined. So far as my own observation has extended, I have 
not yet been able to detect any rule that was generally recognized 
upon this subject, except the simple and obvious one of placing 
about a monument the shields of the persons who were nearest 



MONUMENTAL HERALDRY. 387 

of kin to the indiyidaal commemorated. In the monuments of 
Boyal personages, considerations of state policy might often 
influence this selection ; and it is evident that the propriety of 
placing ahont certain other monuments the shields of the Sove- 
reign and of the Princes of the hlood royal, was regarded as 
heyond all question. The monuments of Bishop Burghersh 
and his brother at Lincoln exemplify this practice ; as do the 
Brasses to Archbishop De Waldeby at Westminster, to Sir 
Symon dk Felbryge, E.G., to Canon Sleford at Balsham, and to 
Thomas Leventhorpe at Sawbridgeworth. When statuettes, or 
*^ weepers," as they were called, were placed about monuments 
in niches or beneath canopies, the shields associated with the 
figures would naturally be identified with the personages repre- 
sented. This is the case in the BeaucuAmp Monument at 
Warwick; and, so far as there exist remains of the original 
memorials, it is the same in the two fine monuments of King 
Edward III. and his Queen Fhilippa, in Westminster Abbey. 
The statuettes and shields upon the magnificent monument of 
Edmond of Lancaster and Aymer de Valence now are by no 
means easily identified ; but they are second to none in either 
artistic excellence or heraldic interest. In yery many instances 
the arms were originally blazoned in colour only, without any 
carving in relief, or any incised outlines; and in such shields 
the blazon is commonly lost, or perhaps it has been repainted, 
and so all traces of the original Heraldry in all probability have 
been destroyed. 

It was customary to repeat the same shield, or the same group 
of shields, upon early monuments ; and it is found that prece* 
dence in arrangement was secured for the most important shield, 
which same shield was sometimes the only one in a series that 
was repeated; an example occurs in the monument to Earl 
William de Valence, where the shield of England is the one 
that has precedence and is repeated. Upon the Monument of 
Alianore of Castile, the shields of England^ Castile and Leon, and 

2 c 2 



388 MONUMENTAL HERALDRY. 

PanihieUy (her husband, her father, and her mother,) alternate, 
and all are repeated. And again, npon the basement of the 
monument of Edward III., a shield of France Ancient and England 
is repeated, alternating with one now charged with the red cross 
upon a golden field ; and, in like manner, his shields of arms 
'* for war and for peace " in alternation surround the monument 
of the Black Prince. See p. 256. 

Without attempting any further to surest what usages may 
have been reoognized and adopted in the arranging and placing 
of heraldic insignia upon mediaaval monuments, I will now 
briefly describe the arrangement of the shields that are still in 
existence upon a few remarkable early examples. 

The monument to King Edward III. Upon the south side, 
each placed beneath a bronze statuette, and all fixed to the body 
of the monument itself, there remain four shields enamelled 
upon copper in their proper blazonry; two other shields are 
lost from the seiies, but the group of six statuettes is complete. 

1. France Ancient and England^ with a silver labd of three poifUs. 

2. Castile and Leon impaling France Ancient and England. 3. 
France Ancient and England, with the Label represented in fac- 
simile in No. 489, PL XXXI. 4. Lost, (the statuette represents 
a bearded man). 5. Brittany^ (ermine), impaling France Andesi 
and England, 6. Lost, (the statuette a youth). The shields yet 
existing are for the Black Prince, the Princesses Joan and Mart, 
and apparently for Edmond, the first Duke of York. As I have 
already stated, upon the basement of this monument there are 
two large enamelled shields of France Ancient and Engkmd, and 
two others bearing, or, a cross gu.; probably these last were 
originally shields of St. Oeorge. 

The Brass to Sir Hugh Hastings, a.d. 1347, Elsyng, Norfolk. 
The principal efiSgy has both a surooat and a shield of Hastings, 
the maunche being beautifully diapered, with a label of three 
points. The shafts of the canopy are formed of eight compart- 
ments, each of them having a canopied e£Bgy, or ^* weeper;'' 



M0NX7MENTAL HERALDRY. 389 

these figures, of which three are now lost, have their armorial 
insignia upon their snrcoat&amp; The figares that remain represent 
Edward III., Henry, Earl of Lancaster, No. 488 a, PL LXni. ; 
Thomas Beauchamp, Earl of Warwick; Ralph, Lord Stafford; 
and Lord St. Amand : the effigies that are lost are those of Law- 
rence Hastings, Earl of Pembroke, No. 338, PI. XXI; a Le 
Despencer; and Eoger, Lord Grey of Euthyn. In the oentral 
spandrel of the canopy is a mounted St. Georoe, his shield 
(No. 311 y PI. XXIX.) and snrcoat and the barding of his chaxger 
being charged with his cross ; and above all are the helm, mant- 
ling and crest of Sir Hugh Hastings. The entire remains of 
this fine Brass have just been engraved by Mr. Utting for the 
Norfolk Archsdological Society. 

The Brass to Alianorb de Bohun, Dnchess of Gloucester, a.d. 
1399, Westminster Abbey. Six shields of arms, suspended from 
the shafts of the canopy. On the dexter side : 1. Her husband, 
Thomas Plant agenet, Duke of Gloucester ; 2. Her father, Hum- 
phrey de Bohun, last Earl of Hereford ; 3. Milo of Hereford. 
On the sinister side : 1. Her husband, impaling De Bohun and 
Milo, quarterly; 2. De Bohun impaling Fitz-Alan and War- 
RENNE, quarterly : the third shield on this side is lost In the 
central spandrel of the canopy, the Swan Badge of the De Bohuns. 
See PI. XX., and No. 511, p. 264. 

The Brass to Joice, Lady Tiftoft, a.d. 1446, Enfield Church) 
Middlesex. There are six shields in this Brass, and they are 
arranged precisely in the same manner as in the last example, 
the De Bohun Brass. On the dexter side : 1. Her father, Edward 
Charlton, Baron Charlton de Powys ; 2. Her husband, Sir John 
TiPTOFT, impaling the impaled shield of her father and mother, 
in which impalement her mother's arms appear to the dexter : 
she was Alianore, daughter of Thomas Holland, Earl of Kent, 
and widow of Boobr Mortimer, fourth Earl of March, and pre- 
cedence was evidently given to her arms in the marshailing of 
this shield in consideration of her exalted rank ; 3. Tiptoft, her 



890 MONUMENTAL HERALDRY. 

husband. On the sinister side : 1. Tiptoft impaling Powys, her 
husband and herself; 2. Fowts and Holland quarterly, her 
father and mother; 3. Fowts, her father and herself. See PL 
XVII., and No. 364 a, F1. XXHI. 

Edmond Flantaqenet, K.G., Duke of York, a.d. 1402, at 
King's Langley, Herts. An elaborate altar-tomb, supportii^ a 
massive plain slab of black marble, which eyidentlj does not 
belong to the monument. On the destruction of the monastic 
church at Langley, this tomb was placed in its present position 
in the north-eaist angle of the parish church. 

The monument is panelled, and in each foliated panel is a 
shield of arms carved in relief upon the alabaster. At the 
head are, St. Edmond, France ancient and England, and Edward 
THE Confessor. At the feet the only remaining shield is Hol- 
land of Kent, the bordure plain. On the north side, com- 
mencing from the west end, Leon, (a lion rampant) and Holland 
of Exeter, the bordure aemSe de lys. On the south side, com- 
mencing firom the west end, the Emperor, the eagle having two 
heads, but not crowned; then two shields of France ancient 
AND England, each with a Label of three points ; then the same 
impaling Castile and Leon ; again, France ancient and Eng- 
land, with a Label of three points ; and the same shield, without 
any Label, but within a bordure ; and the series is completed 
with the same quartered shield, with a Label of five pointa of 
LancoBter and France. The charges on the other Labels uxe no 
longer to be distinguished ; all that may be certainly affirmed is 
that, with the exception of the second shield of the series, these 
Labels have all borne charges. See Nos. 477 a, FL XLV., 486, 
p. 263, and 678 a. Chap. XXXTI. 

The Brass to Sir Simon de Felbryge, K.Q., a.d. 1416. Two 
achievements of arms are lost. There remain, the Banner of 
KiCHARD II., No. 527, PI. XXXV.; the same arms blazoned 
upon a shield; the same arms impaling those of Annb of 
Bohemia ; and Felbrtge, (or, a lion rampt. gu.), impaling Teschen, 



MONUMENTAL HERALDRY. 891 

(a German ooat, arg.y an eagle displayed «a.) : also on two shieldB 
ekfetterloch 

The cresting of the monument of Henrt IY. and his Queen at 
Canterbury, formed of delicately-carved Tudor flowers, originally 
had a small shield of Arms blazoned in colour between each pair 
of the flowers ; of these shields 16, with two half-«hields at the 
extremities, yet remain on the south side ; from which side 18 
other shields have been lost. On the north side 10 shields only, 
with one half-shield remain, and 24 are lost : and all are lost at 
the head and the foot of the monument. Figures of angels also 
once held larger shields, one at each angle, and one in the 
centre of each side : of this series one mutilated shield only, 
that of Scotland, yet remains. The flat canopy itself which 
covers the effigies has evidently been twice painted, the decora- 
tion in both paintings having been heraldic. I commend this 
very interesting monument to the careful consideration of stu- 
dents of Historical Heraldry : and, at the same time, I am 
unable to resist a suggestion, which I would gladly have reach 
those who are in high authority, to the effect that this Boyal 
monument, like its fellows at Westminster, is not qwle in such 
a condition as will be satisfactory to those who know the value 
of our national historical monuments of the highest rank. Let 
no one presume to *' restore " these precious relics of departed 
centuries, since " restoration" and " destruction " are in reality 
interchangeable terms : but, without any destructive restoring, 
our Koyal (and other national) monuments might be kept with 
reverent and vigilant care, and they might be empowered to 
proclaim, even to casual observers, that their worth is under- 
stood by those who, beyond all others, are bound to understand 
and to appreciate it. 

Marqaret Beaufort, Countess of Bichmond, a.d. 1509, West- 

' minster Abbey. An altar-tomb in the early Kenaissance style, 

with an effigy, the work of Torreoiano. The Heraldry is sin 

gularly interesting, and the whole is boldly executed in relief in 



392 HONtJMEXTAL HERALDRY. 

bronze. At the head, Edmokd Tudor impaling Beaufort, her 
first husband and herself, the shield surmounted by a crown not 
arched. On the south side : 1. Her son and his consort, Henry 
YII. and Elizabeth of York ; the shield ensigned with an arched 
crown ; 2. Her husband's mother, and her first husband, Heart 
v., and Katharine of France, the crown arched ; 3. Her grandson, 
Arthur Plantaqenet, Prince of Wales, the crown not arched* On 
the north side : 1. The shield lost, but the arched crown remains ; 
2. Her father and mother, John Beaufort, K.O., Duke of Somerset, 
and Maroaret Beauchamp of Bletsho, the crown not arched ; 3. 
Her paternal grandfather and grandmother, John Bbaufort, 
K.G., (son of John Plantagenet of Qhent), and Margaret Hol- 
land; this shield is without any coronet At the feet, her 
third husband and herself, Stanley impaling Beaufort, without 
any coronet. In this shield, Stanley is quarterly, 1 and 4 grand 
quarters, Stanley, Lathomj and Warrefme, quarterly ; 2 and 3, Ide 
of Man; in pretence, Montanlt. See Plates XXII. and XXXII., 
and No. 567, p. 380. 

The monument erected by James I. to the memory of Queen 
Elizabeth, in Westminster Abbey, is in itself a complete chapter 
of Koyal Heraldry, as such a chapter would be written by the 
Heralds of the first Stuart who wore the crown of Great Britain. 
About the cornice of the architectural canopy of the monument 
is placed a series of thirty -two shields, the shields themselves 
being carved in relief, but their charges are blazoned in gold 
and colours only on flat sur&amp;oes ; and as some, if not all of these 
shields have been painted again at no distant period, there is 
consequently a degree of uncertainty as to their exact fidelity. 
As they now appear these shields, with two exceptions, are 
severally charged with two impaled coats of arms, and they are 
arranged in the order following. 1. The Confessor : 2. Wiluam I., 
England (two lions), and Flanders: 3. Henry I., England and 
ScoUand: 4. Geoffrey Plantagenet, Anjou and England: 5. 
Henry II., England and Aquitaine: 6. John, England, (three 



MONUMENTAL HERALDRY. 393 

lions), and AngouUme^ {hzengy cTy and gu) : 7. Henry III., Eng- 
land and Provence : 8. Edward I., England, and Cagtile and Leon : 
9. Edward II., England and France Ancient: 10. Edward III., 
France Ancient and RainauU : 11. Lionel, Duke of Clarence, 
{}dhd toith three cantons), and De Burgh : 12. MorUmer and Cla- 
rence: 13. Mortimer and Holland, (plain hordwre) : 14. Edmond, 
Duke of York, {label with nine torteaua), and Cagtile and Leon : 15. 
Richard Plantagenot, " of Coningsburgh," (hordure of Lem), and 
Mortimer and De Burgh quarterly : 16. Bighard, Duke of York, 
{labd toith nine torteaux), and NeoiUe : 17. Edward IV., France 
Modem and England, and WidviUe: 18. Henry VII. and Eliza- 
BKTH of York: 19. Henry VIII. and Anne Bolegn: 20. John 
Flantagenet '* of Ohent," (Idbdy with nine ermine spots): 21. John 
" of Ohent " and Boet^—{gu., three Catherine wheels or) : 22. 
Beaufort and Holland : 23. Beaufort and Beauchamp : 24. Edmond 
Tudor, and MARGARirr Beaufort: 25, 26, 27, three impaled 
shields of Boleyn : 28, 29, two impaled shields of Howard ; the 
bend is plain, but the Scottish shield was probably painted out 
when the last re-blazoning took place : 30. Douglas of Angus, 
and Margarbtt Tudor: 31. Stuart of Lennox and Margaret 
Douglas, (the father and mother of Lord Darnley) : 32. Henry 
Stuart, Lord Darnley, and Mart Stuart, Queen of Scotland. 

Upon the canopy, at its four angles, four small shields, held 
by two dragons and two crowned lions, are charged with a rose, 
a fleur de lys, a portcullis, and a harp, all crowned. On the 
basement are four other shields severally bearing, az,, three 
garbs or, (Chester :) az, a harp or, stringed org., (Ireland) : saible, 
ten bezants in pHe, (Cornwall) : and Wales. Also, on either side 
of the canopy there is an achievement of arms; that to the 
south has France Modem and England upon a large shield, with a 
golden lion and dragon as supporters, and the motto, Dieu. et. 
mon. droit, but without any crown ; and on the north side, upon 
another large shield, ScoUand impaling France Modem and Eng- 
land, with a unicorn and lion crowned as supportei's, the arms of 



894 MONUM£NTAL HERALDRY. 

Scotland and the unioom being on (he dexter eide ; the motto is 
King James's own, ** Beati Pacifici." There is no crown above 
the shield. 

The monument of Ludoyic Bobsart, E.G., Lord Boubchier, 
Standard-Bearer to Henbt Y., at Westminster, has shields 
surrounded with the Garter of the Order. Several slabs, now 
despoiled of their Brasses, in Winchester Cathedral, to Prelates 
of the order, show traces of having once been enriched with 
gartered shields of arms. And in Lincoln Cathedral, upon the 
monument of Catherine, the last wife of John Plantaoenet 
of Qhent, the shields of arms were originally surrounded with 
the collar of SS. 

The use of Badges in the heraldic decoration of monuments 
is exemplified at Westminster in the sculptured figures in the 
chantry of Hemry Y.: and again, upon the slab that coven 
the tomb of Sir Humphrey Bourchier, a.d. 1471, which bean 
four richly-quartered shields with labels, and six Baurchier-hnois, 
each one of them surmounting a piece of armour for guarding 
the elbow, No. 695, p. 285 ; these knots are formed of straps, 
one of them distinguished from the other by being studded, and 
both ending in buckles ; the slab also, which still retains the 
brass e£Bgies of Henry Bourchier, Earl of Essex, and Isabella 
his Coimtess, at Little Easton, was originally powdered with 
Baurchier-knoU and feUerlocka. In Brasses at Tong, Salop, a» 
el^hatU appears as a Badge, and an el^hatU and casUe at Wiven- 
hoe in Essex ; the Beauchamp hear is introduced into the Brass 
of the Earl of Warwick ; a slab at Biggleswade is $emSe of cra- 
cenia and eacaUops ; at DigsweU, Herts, Lady Perient has her 
woan Badge embroidered upon her collar ; and at Bumhamthorpe, 
in. Norfolk, in the spandrels of the canopy of the Brass to Sir 
William Calthorpe, is the Knight's Badge, a hawk helled and 
jeseed, on a mount, having a scroll in his beak with the motto, 
Peneer de fyner. 

Examples of arms emblas^ned on Lozenges occur in the menu- 



MONUHENTAL HERALDRY. 395 

ments to Margaret Douolas, GounteBs of Lennox, a.d, 1577 ; to 
the Duchess of Suffolk, a.d. 1563 ; and to Mary Stuart, the 
infant daughter of James I., all of them in Westminster Abbey. 

There is another class of early monuments of a simple 
character, whioh will always be regarded with much interest 
by the Herald. I refer to the monumental slabs, either incised 
or sculptured in relief, that bear certain significant symbols to aJ 

denote the rank, profession, or occupation of the persons com- 
memorated. In almost every instance, the Christian symbol, 
the Cross, appears with the other deyices, and occasionally there 
is also a shield of arms. Memorialfi of this description are 
charged with the mitre, staff, chalice, and book of ecclesiastics ; 
with the warrior's sword, and the pilgrim's staff; with keys, 
bows and arrows, axes, ships, fish, penners and ink-horns, 
trumpets, implements for bell-founding, horsenshoes, hammers, 
nails and anvils, shears, scissors, gloves, shoemakers' imple- 
ments, (these last at Kilkenny) and various other devices of a 
similar character. I have engraved a numerous series of these 
slabs in my *' Ohridian Monuments." 

There still remains a group of symbolical devices, that appear 
in early monuments, anff sometimes in both architecture and 
seals, which may be appropriately noticed at the conclusion of 
this chapter. These are what may be entitled devices of a 
sacred character, and they comprise : 1. The Emblems of the four 
Evangelists : the angd of St. Matthew, the winged lion of St. Mark, 
the winged ox of St. Luke, and the eagle of St. John ; these figures 
were constantly placed at the four angles of Brasses, and other 
commemorative memorials. 2. Hie emblems of our Lord's Passion : 
the cross, nails, scourges, crown of thorns, reed with hyssop, the 
dice of the soldiers, and some others, which are arranged in 
groups and charged upon shields. And, 3. The singular shield 
designed to symbolize the Holy Trinity, which is represented 
in No. 608 ; the example is drawn from the Brass at St. Cross, 
near Winchester, a.d. 1382, to John de Campeden. In the same 



396 



MONUMENTAL HERALDRY. 



Brass there is also a striking example of the shield of the Passion ; 
and other good examples occur in the inlaid pavement tiles at 
Great Malvern. Amongst many others, I may specify some 




No. 608. 



beautiful small shields of the Passion that are Bculptui*ed upon 
the Eamrydge monument at St. Alban's. 




No. 610.— Secrotum of Henry Plantagbnet, second son of Edward 
first Earl of Lancaster. 



CHAPTER XXIV. 

THE HERALDRY OF SEALS AND COINS. 
SECTION I. 

The Art of Seal Engraving, in the first instance singularly nido, 
but from the first giving promise of future excellence, attained 
to its highest perfection in England during the reign of Edward 
III., when it was very extensively practised, and enjoyed the 
greatest popularity. 

Figures of every kind, architecture, heraldic and other de- 
vices, with every conceivable variety both of accessory and of 
legend, were introduced into these early Seals. Hence they 
afford such varied illustrations of the taste, feelings, fancy and 
humour, of the religion also, and of the superstitions of their 
times. History, Genealogy and Biography derive from them 
both evidence and facts of peculiar importance ; and, above all. 
Heraldry might be content to rely upon Seals alone to exemplify 
its principles and to illustrate its practice. 

Seals were not introduced into England until the reign of 



398 THE HERALDBT OF 

Edward the Confessor, from whose time the Eoycd Seals of Bag- 
land form an nninterrupted series of surpassing interest and 
value. Within a few years after the Norman Conquest, the 
use of Seals became generally established; and early in the 
twelfth century they were universally adopted for authenticating 
all written documents. On June 15, 1215, Magna Charta was 
sealed by King John ; nor is a royal signature known to haye 
confirmed a document until the time of Bichard II., at the 
close of the fourteenth century. Perhaps the earliest approxi- 
mation to the signature of a royal personage appears upon a 
warrant of the Black Prince, a.d. 1370, under his privy-eeal, 
which is subscribed by the Prince himself with the words, 
Howmouty Ich Dien, 

Signet^ngs were made either by engraving the required 
designs upon gems, agates, and other hard stones, or by cutting 
the devices and legends on the metal of the rings themselves. 
The larger Seals (and many of the early Seals are of very con- 
siderable size) were engraven on suitable pieces of gold, silver, 
latten or brass, or steel. Jet is found to have been sometimes 
employed, with some other materials. In form the Seals are 
either circular or pointed ovals, the latter shape being that 
generally adopted by Ecclesiastics, though not by any means 
restricted to them. The Royal Seals are circular. In rare 
instances Seals are found lozenge-shaped, triangular, or cut to 
the form of an heraldic shield. The impressions were taken in 
wax of various colours, green, red, dififerent shades of brown, a 
dull yellow, and white. Like Coins, the more important Seals 
were very commonly impressed on both sides. Such impressions 
were appended to documents, and not stamped upon them. In 
taking these impressions, consequently, two dies or matrices, 
each having its own device and legend, were employed; these 
were severally called the Seal and Counter-Seal; but the doMe 
impression constituted a single Seal., its two sides being distinguished 
as its obverse and reverse. In the fifteenth century, it became 



SEALS. 899 

customary to cover the wax for the sake of preserving it with a 
wrapper of paper ; or various ingenious devices were employed* 
for securing the wax from injury, by encircling the impression 
withi " fenders " formed of rushes, leaves, or plaited paper. 
'' Fenders " of this kind have been found attached to Seals as 
early as 1380. Sovereigns and persons of high rank, in addi- 
tion to their official Seal, had a personal or private Seal, desig- 
nated a Secrdum, The same individual also occasionally pos- 
sessed and sealed with more than one Secretum, and where 
several offices were held by one person, he would use a separate 
Seal for each office. 

A very superficial classification of Seals is sufficient to convey 
a correct idea of the comprehensive range of Seal Heraldry, 
Thus, Seals may be classified as, 

I. Ecclmastical^ and II. Lay or Secular. Each of these primaiy 
groups is divisible into (1). Official, and (2). Personal Seals. 
The Personal Seals necessarily comprise unlimited varieties; 
and the Official Seals, both Ecclesiastical and Secular, may be 
sub-divided into those Seals of individuals which make a refer- 
ence to the dignities, offices, or preferments that may be held by 
them; Common Seals of bodies corporate, and the like; and 
Seals of office, that are not identified with any individual officer. 
Thus almost every possible application and expression of Heraldry 
appears in association with Seals. 

The student of Heraldry will do well to take up Seals with 
the intention to deal with them upon some definite system. 
His study, to prove really satisfactory to him, had better be 
devoted, first, to one class of Seals, and then to other classes, 
in such order of succession as he may find to be most desirable. 
For example, the Oreal Seals of England, Scotland, and France 
form three kindred groups for separate and yet connected study. 
Other groups may be formed somewhat after the following 
manner : — ^The Seals of the Archiepiscopal and Episcopal Sees, 
with the Arms of the Archbishops and Bishops: Monastic 



400 THE HERALDRY OF 

Seals : Boyal Secreta : the Seals and Secreta of certain noble 
families, as the De Bohuns, the Fitz-Alaks, the Mortikebs, and 
others : the Seals of knights and esquires : the several dasses of 
Seals of a particular period : or miscellaneous Seals of any 
period. Or again, Seals may be selected for study with reference 
to certain special heraldic qualities in the Seals themselves— 
such Seals, for example, as illustrate MarshalUng Arms, or Cadency, 
or Military Heraldry , or Supporters, or Crests, or Badges in aaBOcia- 
tion with shields, or varied forms of Shields, or Legends, or 
Architectural and other Accessories, In every instance Seals will 
more than satisfy the student's highest expectations. Seals were 
evidently the delight of the early Heralds ; and Seal-HenJdiy, 
accordingly, is Heraldry thoroughly in earnest Such Achieve- 
ments of Arms as abound in Seals, so complete, so spirited, so 
Ml of heraldic life and energy, rarely occur elsewhere. The 
History of Heraldry also is written in Seals with a compre- 
hensiveness, an accuracy, and a copious richness of illustration, 
that leave very little to be desired. I have already shown, 
(Chap. XIY.), in what manner the aggroupment of several dis- 
tinct shields of arms upon a single Seal led to Marshalling; and 
Marshalling, in its most expressive historical forms, is exempli- 
fied in multitudes of Seals. 

The Qreai Seals constitute a truly important chapter in 
Historical Heraldry. Every Seal has two distinct designs. In 
one the Sovereign is represented on horseback, and in the 
other as enthroned. The mounted figures appear always to 
have been regarded as the Obverse, or Seal, and those enthroned 
as the Beverse, or Counter-Seal. Until the time of John, the 
throne in these Seals is a mere stool, with certain ornamental 
accessories. In the second Seal of Henrt III., the royal seat 
assumes a more dignified character. Edward I« copied his 
father's Seal, but the design is better executed. The same 
Seal was used by Edward II., with a Castle of Castile added 
on each side of the throne. Great improvements in design, 



SEALS. 401 

inoluding elaborate arohiteotnral cnricbments, with peculiarly 
interesting Heraldry, were introduced into the different mem- 
bers of the series of Great Seals made by Edward III. He 
commenced by placing ttoofleurs de lys (bis mother, it will be 
remembered, was Isabella of France) above the casUea in the 
Seal of his father and grandfather ; then he substituted for the 
old Seal (in the year of his accession, in the October of 1327) 
a new one, of improved general design, with the fleurs de lys 
much more emphatic. In 1340, a Seal appeared charged with 
two skidds of France Ancient and England quarterly. After this, 
two Qreal Seals of Edward III. were in use, sometimes concur- 
rently — one by the King himself, in which the legend runs Bex 
Francie irr Angue ; and the other, used in England when the 
King was absent in France, with the legend Rex Angue et 
Francie. Another Seal, made in accordance with the peace of 
Bretigny, a.d. 1360, omite the "Francie" altogether jfrom the 
legend, but retains the quartered fleurs de lys in the shield as before. 
The " Francie," however, resumes its original place before the 
' close of the reign. Richard II. and Henry IV. merely sub- 
stituted their own names for the " Edvardus," and they used 
the same Seal as Edward III. In or about 1408 Henrt IY. 
added another Seal, the largest and richest of all the medissval 
Seals of England, in which the fleurs de lys are reduced to three 
in each quarter of the shield. Edward IY. placed a Bose of 
York in alternation with each word of the legend of his Seal, and 
afterwards a Fleur de lys, the .whole being encircled with a 
hordure of Boses. Henrt YII. introduced a Bose on a Branch : 
and Henry YIXJ. separated the words of his legend by alternate 
Boses and Fleurs de lys ; he added a Fleur de lys and a Lion to the 
obverse of his Seal, and eventually he adopted a Seal designed 
after the manner of the Renaissance. 

The equestrian figures of the obverse of the Great Seals afford 
characteristic illustrations of arms and armour, and also of horse 
equipments. In the second Seal of Richard I., the three lions 

2 D 



402 THE HERALDRY OF 

of England for the first time ma^e their appearance on the royal 
shield. Edward I. places them on the bardings of his charger, 
as well as upon his shield, but not upon his surcoat; and 
Edward III. appears with a full display of royal blazonry upon 
the appointments as well of his horse as of his own person. The 
succeeding heraldic changes in the Great Seal of England I leave 
to the researches of students, The Great Seal of the Common- 
wealth, however, I may describe, as a curious example of Puritan 
Heraldry. This Seal, which was voted by the Commons, 
January 9th, 1649, was adopted on the 8th of the following 
month, when it was formally declared to be *' the Great Seal of 
England." Two years later this same Seal appears in such a 
form as this : Obverse, — A Jtfop of England and Irdand ; in Ote 
Channel a Fleet ; in chief a Shield of St. (George ; in hose a ShiM of 
Ireland : Legend,—" The Great Seale (f England, 1651 :" Beverse, 
— The House of Commons sitting : Legend, — " In Ae third Yeare o/ 
Freedoms by Chd's Blessing restored, 1651." Upon his own Seal 
Oliver Cromwell bore, quarterly, 1 and 4, the Cross of St. Oeorge; 
2, the Cross of St. Andrew ; 3, Irdand, (az., a harp or) ; over all in 
pretence, for Cromwell, so., a Uon rampt. guard, arg. : with these 
arms the Protector assumed as Supporters the Crowned Lion of 
England with a Sea-horse; and he also borrowed the Helm, 
Crown, Crest, and Mantling, from the Royal Scab. Below ^ 
Shield is the motto, Pax. qu^rifur. bello.; and the circum- 
scribing Legend is, Olivarius: Dei : gra: Beipvh: AngluB: Scotice: 
et : HibemfB : dc. : Protector. This Seal was engraved with much 
delicacy, in the heraldic feeling of his time, by Thomas Simon. 

The Great Seals of several other personages of importance in 
the mediaeval history of England abound in heraldic accessories 
and devices ; amongst them, as an example of the greatest in- 
terest, I may specify the Great Seal of John of Ghent, as King 
of Castile. The Great Seal of Thomas, second Earl of Lancaster, 
is a very noble work. On his own helm and on the head of his 
charger, the Prince displays a dragon as his crest, No. 524, 



c ad:ei^ c^. 



SKAl, c&gt;r mi.lJAM OF. ROMARK. 

EARL Of LINCOL.V U»H 




,v r_'. 



SEALS. 408 

PI. XXXV. The Counter-Seal is also large and very fine. The 
shield is differenced with a label of five points " of France/' 
and on either side of it there is a dragon. The Great Seal of 
Thomas of Woodstock, Duke of Gloucester, is another fine ex- 
ample of its class. 

The practice prevalent with the early seal-engravers to intro- 
duce some figure or figures of animals^ all of them without doubt 
Badges, on each side of either the Shield or the Crest, I have 
already stated to be in all probability instrumental in intro- 
ducing regular Supporters as accessories of Achievements of Arms 
(see p. 277) ; and I have also referred to many fine and interest- 
ing examples of early Seals. It will be necessary for me here 
to adduce only a few other examples in further illustration of 
the '* Heraldry of Seals." No. 609, PI. XLV., is copied from 
Mr. Planchi&amp;'s enlarged representation of the shield of Wiluam 
DE BoMARE III., Earl of Lincoln, who died as early as 1198. 
This shield is held by the Earl, armed in mail, with a cylindrical 
helm, and on horseback. The original appears to have been 
lost, but a drawing of this very curious Seal is preserved in an 
heraldic MS. in the City Library at Chester. The crosslets are 
undoubtedly very early " differences." A Secretum of Willl^m 
LoNGESP^E, Earl of Salisbury, (" Fair Bosamond's " son), who 
died A.D. 1226, is simple and significant; it is charged fwith his 
long sword and Ua belt : the Seal bears the mounted figure of the 
Earl, with his shield of six lioncels, and with two similar lioncels 
on the barding of his charger ; his Countess, Ela, is represented 
on her Seal standing between two lions, the Counter-Seal being 
charged with the six lioncels of her husband. These Seals are 
engraved in the Scdithury Volume of the " Archax)logical Institute," 
where they illustrate an admirable paper (one of an equally 
admirable series of papers of the same class) on ** The Earldom 
of Salisbury'' by Mr. John Gough Nichols, F.S.A. Ranulph 
DE Blondeville, Earl of Lincoln and Chester, a.d. 1217-1232, 
on his Seal carries a shield charged with three garbs, and the 

2 D 2 



404 



THE HEBALDRT OF 



same bearings appear upon ihe barding of his charger; the 
Counter-Seal has a similar shield. The Seal of Bogeb de Quenci, 
Earl of Winchester, a.d. 1220-1264, displays his shield nuuculSe. 
And Henry de Lact, Earl of Lincoln, a.d. 1272, on both his 
Seal and his Secretum has his shield charged with his nuitpont 
lion. 

Two early Seals of the Nevilles exemplify both the forms of 
the shields that were represented by the Heralds of Henry III. 
and Edward I., and their treatment of the Label as a mark of 
Cadency ; Nos. 667 and 668, Chap. XXXI. Another Seal of the 




No. 703. — Seal of M auger le VAVAssom. 





No. 238 A.— Seal of the Dauphin Lons. No. 702.— Seal of Thtiotan. 



SEALS. 405 

same early period is charged with a similar shield of St. John, 
No. 700, Chap. XXXI. ; and in the corresponding Seal, No. 701, 
of a St. John of Sussex, the shield has its own chief with its six- 
pointed mvUeta charged upon a field of Warrewne^ a remarkable in- 
stance of heraldic combination. The shield in tihis interesting 
Seal is supported, affcer a very rade fashion, by three dragon-like 
monsters. Again : the heraldic Seal of Thurstan, " Dispenmtoria 
Begis" No, 702, is another early example, with which may be 
associated the Seal of Mauger le Vavassour, No. 703 : this last 
shield bears the letter M, the initial of the owner's name ; or, 
possibly title device, which afterwards was modified into the well 
known fesse dancette of the Vavassours, was originally designed 
to be a monogram of the two initials, M V. With this early 
group may be associated the Seal of the Dauphin Louis, a.d. 1216, 
which bears a shield semSe de lys, No. 238 a, p. 404 ; (See also 
p. 73.) 

About the same period, Alice, Countess of Eit, the wife of 
Ealph, brotiher of IIuoh de Lusionan (father of Earl William de 
Valence, see p. 188,) on her Counter-Seal bears a shield of 
Lusignan — harruly org. and az, — differenced with a Idbd of senen 
points: she died in 1227, her daughter Maude having married 
the HuMPHRET DE BoHUN of that time, and thus the two families 
of the powerful Earls of Hereford and Pembroke were connected. 
Nearly a century later, the Seal of John de Warrenne, Earl of 
Surrey, bears his shield— cA^^wee or and az, — surmounted by a 
lion of England, and between the two harheU and the crossUU 
fitchSes of the house of De Barr, No. 329 c, PL LXXXI. This 
great Earl had married Joan, daughter of Henrt, Count De 
Barr and his Countess Alianore, eldest daughter of Edwabd I., 
and he was himself the lineal descendant of Geoffrey of Anjou. 
The Seal of the Countess Joan I have described, with a diagram. 
No. 329, at page 150. Sandford has engraved this Seal (p. 122, . 
2nd edition), and it is also represented with its Charges in 
Eeraldry of Fish, p. 70. 



406 



TH£ HERALDRY OF 



Joan, the second daughter of Edward II. was married to 
Gilbert de Clare, Earl of Gloucester and Hertfx)rd, and their 
youngest daughter, Eliza'beth de Clare, became the wife, first, 
of John de Burgh, eldest son of Richard, Earl of Ulstee; 
secondly, of Theobald de Verdun ; and thirdly, of Booer d' Amorl 
Her Seal, No. 705 a, PL LXXXL, is another interesting and 
characteristic example of the aggronpment of several distinct 
Coats, so as to form a single componnd composition, (see p. 150); 
thus, in the central compartment of the Seal is the shield of 
Roger d'Amori — harry nd&gt;ulie of six org. and gu.^ a bend so, (Boll 
of E. II.) — environed by the three lions- of England; in chief is 
TJhlery differenced by a label : in base is Verdun — or, frettSe gu,, 
(Bolls of H. III. and of E. II., and Seal to the Barons' Letter); 
to the dexter and sinister are Clare ; and at the four angles the 
easUe and lion of Castile and Leon appear alternately. The 
Seal of Elizabeth, daughter of the Joan last named by her last 
marriage with Boger d'Amori, bears a close resemblance to the 
Seal of her mother, and may very advantageously be compared 
with it as an illustration of the heraldic feeling and usage of the 
first half of the fourteenth century. This Seal, No. 705, which, 



mm- 



WMk 




No. 706.— Seal of 

BiATILDA DE FiLUOL. 



No. 704.— Seal of Johk. 
Lord Babdolf. 



No. 705.— Seal of Elea- 
BCTH, Lady Babdolf. 

with the Seal of the husband of Elizabeth d'Amori, John, Lord 

Bardolf, is attached to a deed, dated 1340, has a central circular 

compartment surrounded by eight others, the whole being on a 



SEAL- S. 



CHAPTEK XX" 




Plat^LXXXI, 



A D-u^:aincr ~th V Br^^*" S^ut ^&gt;Vr .i&gt;' T'.! 



SEALS. 407 

field of what I may desoribe as Gothic architeotural diaper : in 
the centre is a shield of Bardolf, (No. 388 b, PI. XXVII.— as., 
three dnquefotla or.)y with Uhter (without any label) in chief and 
base, to the dexter CZore, to the sinister d^ Amort, and Castile and 
Leon as before in the compartments of the angles. The Seal of 
John, Lord Bardolf himself (he married Eliz. d'Amori in 1337) 
is remarkable for its elaborate traceries, No. 704, and the 
exquisite skill with which the seal-engiaver has executed his 
rich design : the impression of this beautiful Seal which lies 
before me also shows that, without considerably enlarging the 
scale of the original, it is not possible to give a perfectly satis- 
factory engraving of it The Seal of EnzABErrH de Bury, 
figured'^in Norfolk Archoeol., (v., 301,) is another good specimen 
of a compound heraldic Seal. The small Seal of Matilda, 
daughter of Roger de Lascelles, No. 706, is another graceful 
variety of this same interesting class : in the years 1288 and 
1293 she was married, first to Sir W. De Hilton, and secondly 
to Sir R De Filliol; accordingly, her Seal has the shield of 
Lascelles — org,, three chaplets gu, ; Hilton — org., two bars az, ; and 
Filliol — gu,f a lion rampt, arg,, over all a'hendlet az. (Another 
shield of Filuol is vairSe, a cardon gu.) Two other equally cha- 
racteristic examples of Seals of this class, Nos. 329 b, and 331, 
are described at page 152. 

The dimidiated Seal of Margaret, second Queen of Edward I., 
for the first time exhibits a shield charged with the arms of 
England and France united in a single composition, No. 322, 
PI. XVm. ; and the second Seal of this same Royal Lady, No. 
332 A. PI. LXXXI., shows the Boyal Shield o/ England environed 
with thefleurs de lys of France on the field of the Seal itself, after 
the manner of a bordnre ; (See p, 152.) The Seal of William de 
Clinton, Lord of Aixbsley, who in 1337 was created Earl of 
Huntingdon, exemplifies precisely the same usage at a somewhat 
later period — a.d. 1333. This William de Clinton was the 
second of the two sons of Sir John de Clinton and Ida his wife. 



408 THE HERALDRY OF 

one of the co-heiresses of William de Odingsells, of Maxworth 
Castle, and he married Juliana, sole heiress of Sir Thomas de 
Letbourne. His Seal is charged with a shield of ClitUon, (as it 
is blazoned for him in the Calais Boll)~ar^., six croadets JUckees 
M., and on a chief az. two muUeta or,^ within an octofoil ; and ike 
field of the Seed itself displays eight lioncelSf which form a hordnre 
about the shield. No. 332 b., PI. LXXXI. ; see also No. 400, 
PI. XXXVII. The Arms of Leybourne are, a«., six lioncds org,, 
Eoll of H. UL; (See ArchcBol Cantiana, 1., 1, and v., 192.) A 
deed, dated June 13th, 1350, executed by this same Earl of 
Huntingdon, has the same shield, with the six lioncels of Le^- 
bourne upon the field of the Seal, and in base two small difs 
of oak ; (ArchcBohgiOy xxxviii., 272.) In the Eoll of £. III., 
three mtdlets are charged on the chief of Wiluah Cunton, and 
also on the chief of his elder brother John, Lord Clinton, whose 
shield is without the crosslets : and in the Boll of R. II., John 
DE Clynton bears, arg., on a chief ax., two mullets or, pierced gu, ; 
(See p. 183). The Secretum of Henry, second son of Edmond, 
the first Earl of Lancaster, who afterwards succeeded his father 
and his elder brother in that Earldom, claims particular atten- 
tion. No, 610, p. 397 ; (see also p. 235). It bears the shield of 
the Earl — England differenced with an azure hendlet, as he displayed 
the same composition upon his banner at Caerlaverock. This 
adoption of a bendlet *' for Difference " by a younger son, in the 
early days of Cadency, shows a disinclination at that time to 
multiply the differencing charges upon labels. Henry, first 
Duke of Lancaster, the only son of Earl Henry, also differenced 
during his father's lifetime with a bendlet, as appears from his 
Seal, with the legend, s : henrici : langastrie : comitis : berbeye, 
engraved in the Archodd, Journal, vol. x. p. 329. In the Roll 
of E. III., the Arms of this Prince are thus blazoned, *' Le Covaiit 
de Darby port lea armes d*Engleterre a une boston d'assure : he was 
created Earl of Derby in 1337, succeeded to the Earldom of 
Lancaster on the death of his father in 1345, and became Duke 




CHAITKK XXIV. 

PLATE LXX. 

Heraldic Seals. 

No 509. (1. -Seal of Thomas Plantaoexl-i-. K.G., Duko of Gu,ic«n«: 

' A.1,. 1390 : pagCH 241. 2.58, 277. 409. 

No 397a (2. -Seal of William de Bohlk. K.G., Earl of Noktha-™,N: 
^ ■ "^ ' A.D. 1350: pages 186. 409. 

N0.338A. (3.)-8ealofHiMrHREY de Bohto Earl of Hereford; a.v. 1320: 

page -A 01). 

No 525 4)-S«a or Thomas Hollamd, K G.. Karl of Kent; ao,. 1:«0: 

pii^'os 247, 278, 409. 



SEALS. 409 

in 1352. The Seal of Queen's (College, Oxford, one of the most 
beautiful heraldic Seals in existence, is charged with three 
shields ; to the dexter a shield of France Ancieni and England ; 
to the sinister a shield of Queen Fhilippa, of Hainault, bearing 
England quartering HainauU, as in Xo. 337, p. 159 ; and in base 
the Anus of the College, or^ three eagles disp. gu. Again, the fine 
Seal of Thomas Arundel, Archbishop of Canterbury, a.d. 1396- 
1414, in the base of the composition is charged with the 
Boyal Shield of Bichard II., IVance Ancient and England impaled 
by the C&lt;mfe88or, No. 536 a, PI. LVIII., and with the shield of 
the Archbishop himself; ArchcBologia^ xxyi., 297. The beau- 
tiful Seals of Thomas of Woodstock, Duke of Gloucester, and of 
Thomas Holland, E.O., Nos. 509, 525, Fl. LXX., I have already 
described ; see pp. 241, 258, 277. In Xos. 397 a, 398 a, also in 
PI. LXX., two Seals of the De Bohuns, Earls of Hereford and 
Northampton, are xepresented ; the mullets of Northampton here 
have six points, and the Earl of Hereford shows his close alliance 
with the Crown of England by introducing three liana paaeant 
guardani into the composition of his Seal. Again, at p. 271, I 
have described the remarkable Seal of the Mortimers, No. 270, 
which appears at the end of this Chapter, together with the 
curious Seal of Edmund de Arundel, No. 270 a, which I am 
enabled to show side by side with No. 270. About a.d. 1400, the 
Seal of Sir William de Braose displays in the centre of the com- 
position his own achievement of arms, with the separate shields 
of Andeyille, St. Leoer, St. Omer and Malmains on either side. 
In his excellent and judicious *' Ouide to the Study of Heraldry " 
(page 38), Mr. Montagu refers to] another most interesting Seal 
of the same £unily of De Braose or De Brewys, which bears on 
a shield, az,^ crrmUe, a lion rampt. or^ (See p. 175 and No. 390 a, 
PI. XXXVn.), dimidiating Mortimer (No. 99, p. 31), and having 
in chief, charged on a roundle, the Arms of England. This Seal, 
attached to a deed dated 1373, (Harl. MS. 5805,) was adopted 
by Beatrice, youngest daughter of Boger Mortimer, first Earl of 



412 THE HERALDRY OF 

bardings of their chargers also rich with heraldic devices, ahoond 
in the Seals to which the student of Heraldry will be certain to 
assign a place of honour in his collection. As typical examples 
of this most interesting class, in addition to the Great Seals, 1 
have selected the Seals of William Lonoesp^e, Earl of SaUsbnry, 
(died 1226) ; of Henry de Laci, Earl of Lincoln and Salisbury, 
(died 1272); of Eobert de Verb, Earl of Oxford, No. 728, 
PL LXXXIL, (died 1296) ; of Humphrey de Bohun, Earl of 
Hereford, (killed 1322) ; of William Montacute, Earl of Salis- 
bury, No. 729, (died 1343); and of Jaspar Tudor, K.G., Earl of 
BiCHMOND and Duke of Bedford, (died 1497). 

Bepresentations of the shipping of the olden time, which were 
taught to share in the heraldic sentiment of their era, are not un- 
common in medisBval Seals. In many of these Seals the drawing 
is curiously imperfect in the proportions of the crews and of the 
ships that carry them, and also in the comparative sizes of these 
ships and the fish that are represented as swimming in their own 
proper element beneath the keels. The special characteristic of 
these vessels when they carry sail is the heraldic blazoniy, 
which is displayed upon the sails themselves ; see p. 288, and 
No. 630, PI. XXXV. The armorial compositions cover the entire 
area of the sails, making them sails of arms, until in the six- 
teenth century shields of ample dimensions were charged upon 
the sails, as in the Seal of Charles, Lord Howard of EfiBngham, 
the Lord High Admiral of England who encountered and, aided 
by the winds, gave so good an account of the Armada. In the 
Seal of Thomas Beaufort, Duke of Eiceter, an earlier '* High 
Admiral," (about 1416,) the sail of his ship is charged over its 
entire surface with the Arms of Beaufort, No. 479, PL XXXIl. : 
at the stem of the vessel also there is a banner of France and 
England, and forward another banner bearing a simple cross. John 
Holland, Earl of Huntingdon, (a.d. 1436,) upon his Seal as 
^* Admiral of England, Ireland, and AquUaine," displays a mucb 
nobler looking ship, with a splendid sail of Holland of Exeter ; 



SEAL'S. 



CJLAPTER XX:V. 




■VniiULAM MONTACUTE , EARL OF SAUSBXmY. 



Plate LXXXII, 



A I&gt;tirZjL.'kn Jxlk ^S.Brtwer 3irett. .V-V*^ .V' V/" 



SEALS. 



413 



No. 477 A, Plates XLV. and LXV. Another Seal of the same 
order, thirty years later, is charged with the splendid ship of 
Louis of Bourbon, Admiral of France : (See ArchBohgiay xxvi., 479 ; 
also xiv., and xviii., 434.) The Seals of the Cinque Ports of Kent 
and Sussex exhibit several curious ships, which display their 
own proper banner, the lions and ships dimidiaied, as in No. 326 a, 
PL LXXX., with the Banner and the Shield of England; (see 
Sussex ArchcBol, I. 14, and Heraldry of Fish, 178). The original 
Seal of Great Yarmouth in Norfolk, again, with its three very 
fine herrings in base, is charged with a fishing-vessel of the 
middle of the 14th century; (Heraldry of Fish, 150). 
The Counter-Seal of Jaspar Tudor, K.G., uncle of Henry VII., 




No. 683.— Anns of Jaspar Tudor, K.G.. from his Seal (See p. 249.) 



an impression of which is attached to a grant of land in the 
county of Monmouth, bears his shield of arms, supported by a 
dragon and a wolf, and ensigned by a cap of estate of very large 
dimensions, closely resembling the caps that are sculptured upon 
the Monuments of Duke Humphrey Plantagenet and Abbot 



414 THE HERALDRY OF 

Ramrtdqb, at St. Alhan's. It is remarkable that in this shield 
the quarters of France Modem have the fleurs de lys arranged 
one and ttoo, instead of ttoo and one ; {Archceol, xviii., 429,) No. 
683. In a Seal of the '* White CarmelUes of HUchin," Hertford- 
shire, a quartered shield of England and France Modem, England 
being in (he 1st and 4M qwaiers, is introduced, with another shield 
of England only ; (ArchcBcl, xviii., 447.) The Seal of Edward IV. 
for his Ghanceiy of Monmouth bears England with a kibd of 
France^ and is a fine example of Seal Heraldry ; (ArchoscL Joanud, 
xiv., 55.) The two curious Seals of Edward PLANXAOENirr and 
Arthur Tqdor, as Princes of Wales, already described, (see 
pp. 259 and 325, and PI. LX., No.*699), must be here specified 
as valuable examples of their class; and with them may be 
associated the judicial Seal — " s. ivdiciale"— of Queen Elizabcth, 
for the Counties of Caermarthen, Glamorgan, and Pembroke, on 
the reverse of which, beneath the quartered shield of France 
Modem and England^ (the fleur de lys ttoo and one), supported by 
a dragon and an heraldic antelope, is a scroll with the] motto 
10 : DEN, and the badge of three feathers grouped together, and 
having their tips bending over ; (Archceol. xxxi., 495.) 

At page 279, I have referred to a few early Scottish Heraldic 
Seals of great interest, and amongst others to the Secretnm of 
James I., a.d. 1429, which bears the Royal Shield of Scotland 
ensigned with a crown of beautiful design, and regularly sup- 
ported by two lions rampant guardant. These, fhc earliest Kojal 
Scottish Supporters, continued in use until James V. substituted 
two unicorns for the two lions their predecessors. In the Garter- 
Plate of James V. of Scotland, who was elected a Knight of the 
Garter in 1533, the shield is supported by two unicorns argent, 
royaUy gorged and chained or. In this achievement the crest is a 
lion passant gu., upon a coronet or, holding in his dexter paw a naked 
sword erect ppr,, with the motto, " in my defence." Upon the 
Great Seal of this Prince the lion of the crest is passani guardaiU ; 
and it was so borne' by James IV., and his three immediate pre- 



SEALS. 415 

decessors. The present Crest of Scotland, No. 667, PL XL VI., 
was first adopted by James VI. of Scotland, the first King of 
Great Britain. 

I must be content here to adduce only three other examples 
of early Scottish Seals ; the first of these, the Seal of Walter 
Lesue, Lord of Boss, a.d. 1367, is perhaps the earliest compo- 
sition in which [quartering arms is known to have been intro- 
duced into Scottish Heraldry ; it bears, first and fourth, a bend 
charged wUh three buckles, for Leslie, and second and third, three 
lions rampt,, for Boss. The next Seal, that of William, first Earl 
of Douglas and Earl of Mab, bears, 1 and 4, for Douglas, a human 
heart, and on a chief three mullets ; 2 and 3, for Mar, a bend between 
six crossleis fitchies. And lastly, the Seal of Joan, daughter of 
John de Beaufort, Earl of Somerset, the widow of James I. of 
Scotland, which bears the arms of Scotland impaling those of 
Beaufort upon a lozenge. The first and the last of these three 
Seals are engraved in Mr. Seton's " Law and Practice of Heraldry 
in ScoUand," a work which was published early in the last year, 
and shortly after the appearance of the first edition of my own 
volume. I gladly avail myself of this opportimity for recording 
my admiration of Mr. Seton's most excellent work, which cannot 
fail to command the cordial sympathy of every true lover of 
Heraldry, on whichever side of the Tweed he may have his 
home. Mr. Sbton has the true feeling of a Herald, coupled with 
the resources of a sound and learned lawyer and an accomplished 
scholar, and he writes with an earnestness and also with such 
a thorough mastery of his subject, that his book at once takes 
rank as a standard authority. 

The woodcut which follows, No. 707, drawn from the Seal of 
John, Earl of Arundel, exemplifies the spirited manner in which 
the heraldic artists of the fifteenth century introduced Supporters 
into their compositions. The shield quarters Fiix-Ahxn and Malr 
travers'-gu,, a lion rampt. org., and or,frMe sa. (See p. 278.) I 
may here refer studento to the learned paper by Sir Harris 



416 



THE HERALDRY OF 



Nicholas on the Seals affixed to the Barons' Letter to the Pope in 
1301, printed in the ArchcBclogia^ vol. xxi., pp. 192-231 ; to some 
" Observations on the use of Seals in England," in Archsol.^ xviii., 
pp. 12-20, and 47; to various curious and valuable papers on 




No. 707.— Seal of John, Earl of ABUia&gt;EL. 

Seals in the publications of the ArchcBologtcal Instilute and the 
Archceological AssocicUion; and to the numerous and varied en- 
gravings of Seals that illustrate Surtees' History of Durham, 



SECTION II. 



COINS. 



The Heraldry of the Coinage in its general capacity may be 
said to be identical with other expressions of the Royal Heraldry 
of England. The Shield of Arms of the reigning Sovereign, with 
certain significant Devices as accessories, would naturally be 
expected to appear on English Coins ; and such an expectatdon 
in many instances would be realized. In such Coins the Herald 
finds authoritative examples both of the Boyal Shield and the 
favourite Royal Badges of each successive period. The Heads of 
the Sovereigns also place before him the changes in the form of 



COINS. 417 

the Boyal Crown wbioh took plaoe from time to time. But our 
Coins have other types, also heraldio, which possess great his- 
torical interest. 

The NMe, (introdnoed by Edwabd TIL), the Bose-Ncble or 
Bial, (Edward IV.), the Angd, (Henry VI.), the Sovereign, 
(Henry VII.), the George Noble, (Henry VH.), all in gold, and 
the Oroum in both gold and silver, (Henry VIII.), stand fore- 
most amongst those English Coins which do not bear the Eoyal 
Shield of Arms. The Noble of Edward III. is charged with a 
iigare of the King, crowned, in armour, and with his sword, his 
shield bearing France Ancient and England quarterly, standing 
in a ship which carries at its mast-head ajpeitnon of St. Oeorge, 
This type is found to have been slightly modified under the 
succeeding princes. Thus, Queen Elizabeth is seated in her 
ship, and holds a sceptre ; and the ship itself is charged with a 
Tudor Boee, and carries at the bow a banner bearing the 
initial, a Gothic E. The Rose-Ncble has one or more Eoses 
added to the type of the Noble itself. Both these Coins 
have on their reverse a group of Boyal Devices with Crowns. 
The type of the obverse of the Nobles gave rise to the following 
couplet, the significance of which will be felt by every student 
of English Heraldry : 

** Four things our Koblb Bhoweth unto me,— 
King, Skip, and Sword, and Power of the Secu'* 

The Angd, on the obverse, bears a figure of the Archangel 

St Michael thrusting down the Serpent; on the reverse is a ship 

with a Cross for a mast, with the Boyal Shield, a rose, and an 

initial The Oeorge NMe has St Oeorge mounted, and the 

Dragon. The Sovereign has a figure of the reigning Prince, 

generally enthroned, the reverse bearing the Boyal Shield, with 

various accessories. The Oroum in gold of Henry VIII. has a 

crowned rose, and a crowned shield of arms, with the royal 

cypher. The silver Crown of Edward VI. has the King on 

horseback, and the Boyal Shield ; but that of Elizabeth sub- 

Htitutes a crowned bust for the equestrian figure. In both of 

2 r 



418 



THE HERALDBT OF COINS. 



these silver coins the Royal Shield is charged in pretence with 
a floriated Cross, which extends beyond the shield, and divides 
the legend into four parts. This arrangement of the Cross was 
a prevailing type of the earlier Coins ; it first appears with the 
shield of arms upon the shilling of Henrt YII., and it was dis- 
continued by James L The Fifteen-Shilling piece of that 
King is charged with the Royal Arms as borne by the Stnarts. 
The Crown of Chaeles IT. has four crowned shields of England, 
Scotland^ France^ and Ireland in cross, the shields in the earlier 
examples alternating with the Royal Cypher. Four shields 
placed in the same manner also appear on the Crowns and 
Shillings of William TIL and Anne, and they are reproduced 
upon Queen Victoria's Florins. 

It is remarkable that, until a comparatively recent period, 
the types of all the Coins, whatever their size or value, are of 
equal artistic excellence ; nor is it less worthy of remark, that 
in our own times the types of the Coinage should be distin- 
guished by such excessive degradation. With the sole exceptions 
of the Sovereign and Oroum that bear the St George upon their 
Reverses, and the recent bronze coinage, our modem Coins appear 
in most unfavourable contrast with the Angels and Nobles that 
have long ceased to be current in this country. I still retain, 
however, a long-cherished hope that the Art of the^jNumismatist 
may at length revive, and again demonstrate its ability to execute 
truly noble Coins in the Royal Mint of England. 





No. 270.— Remains of the Seal of Ei&gt;- No. 270 a.— Seal of Edmuwd de Arttk- 
MTND Mortimer, a.t&gt;. 1.S72. See p. 271. del, afterward Earl, l.SOl-1326. 



^% 



I "A \ I. 



^...,„,,''i 




No. 522— Pannchc-CreBt of John, Lord Scrope, K.G., from his 
Stall-Plate. See pp. 121 and 267. 



CHAPTER XXV. 

THE HERALDRY OF ILLUMINATIONS. 

The Illuminations which at once illustrate mediaaval Manu- 
scripts, and take so important a part in conveying the historical 
information that we derive from them, abound both in direct 
heraldic records, and in those practical suggestions which are of 
such great utility to modem Heralds. Authorities for a very 
considerable number of early shields and badges are supplied 
by these Illuminations, and, at the same time, they are rich in 
diapers, and other heraldic accessories. So that the student of 
Heraldry may always look to these early works, as to treasuries 
well stored with objects of value and interest. In like manner, 
Heraldry provides for the Hluminators of our own times abundant 
materials exactly adapted to their use. 

The revival of the early Art of Illumination, and the degree 
of popularity which it now enjoys, naturally lead to inquiries 
relative to the means that may be best calculated to render the 

2 E 2 



420 THE HERALDRY 

revived Art permanently popular. I believe that this can be 
aocomplished only by rendering it an Art really our own. The 
mere copying early Illuminations, however attractive in itself 
and really useful as a system of study, will not suffice to produce 
a school of modem Illuminators. Neither will the Art of Illu- 
mination rise even to be recognized as an universally desirable 
accomplishment, unless it be made to lead beyond the most 
careful colouring of certain sentences and words more vetudo. 
Our Illuminators must embody some thought of their own in 
their works ; they must make their works vehicles for recording 
something and conveying something, that they have themselves 
imagined and devised ; and their illuminated details and acces- 
sories must have a genuine art-character, and a true feeling for 
the particular art of Illuminating as it is practised by themselves* 
I do not desire to suggest that all modem Illuminators should 
aspire to becoming independent designers of whatever they may 
illuminate. But while the great majority of them fieely avail 
themselves of the aid that lithography is always ready to tender, 
(an aid which their mediseval predecessors would have been bnt 
too thankful to have secured, had it been placed within their 
reach), it is most important that modem Illuminators should 
seek, not only for those printed outlines that are complete in 
themselves and require only the application of gold and colour, 
but such others also as may be of a suggestive character, and 
which the Illuminators may apply in carrying out certain ideas 
of their own. 

There appear to be four distinct classes of modem Blumina- 
tions. The first consists of Texts from the Holy Scriptures, or 
other brief passages of a directly religious character. The 
second class comprises choice brief extracts from various authors, 
both poets and prose writers. To the third class belong complete 
illuminated metrical works. And in the f&lt;mrth class I would 
comprehend every such extract, version, copy, or composition 
as may be directly either historical, or biographical, and which 



OF ILLUMINATIONS. 421 

consequently may obtain from Heraldry its happiest and most 
appropriate illustrations. Heraldry, it is true, wUl provide 
much that will prove to be eminently attractive, and truly con- 
sistent also, in lUuminations of every class ; for, if it does not 
always offer Shields of Arms, or Banners, or Badges, it is certain 
to suggest treatment and to supply accessories. But in all 
historical subjects, Heraldry is the Illuminator's most valuable 
ally. And these are subjects that are certain to be held in 
esteem. Passages from the old chroniclers, brief but emphatic 
summaries of great historical periods, graphic records of cele- 
brated historical incidents, or similar biographititd sketches of 
the representative Personages of Histoiy ; historical charts and 
genealogies of every kind, and, in many instances, family gene- 
alogies, records and traditions, are all equally well suited to 
form materials for Illumination ; and, in every case, Heraldry is 
replete with exactly what the Illuminator vrill find to be best 
qualified to illustrate his work, and also to impart to it the most 
brilliant of decoration. 

Groups of historical shields, derivable from early Bolls of 
Arms, with appropriate borders and brief legends, form beautiful 
pages for Illumination. Groups of such shields and borders, 
with certain other compositions of a somewhat similar class, 
amateurs may desire to obtain in outline, and also various acces- 
sories and illustrations which are well adapted to be made 
popular through the agency of lithography. I venture to pro- 
mise to Heraldic Illuminators that trustworthy outlines of this 
description shall be provided for their use. The promise con- 
tained in the last sentence yet remains^ while the third Edition 
of this Volume is in the press, to be frilfilled : it has not been 
foi^tten, however, and I trust that it will be speedily realized. 




No. 602.— Arms of the Hebalds* College, from the Shield blazoned in 
the College. See p. 3G4. 



(JHAPTEK XXVI. 

OKNICALOGIKS. 

Amongst the most important of the professional daties of the 
Herald who holds Office in the College of Arms, are the investi- 
gation, the display, and the fitithfol enrolment of Geneaiooees. 
And in tracing ont and arranging Historical Genealogies, the 
Amateur Herald will find that he is enabled to elucidate and to 
illustrate History in the clearest and most impressive manner. 
In the History of England, indeed, there occur many important 
chapters and no less numerous episodes, all of which absolutely 
rely upon genealogiccd illustration to render them clearly intel- 
ligible. And the genealogical form of tabular arrangement is 
peculiarly adapted to convey historical teaching with emphatic 
distinctness, while it is always available for prompt referenoe. 
I much (question whether the History of the ** Wars of the 
Roses" can be either written or read satisfactorily without his- 
torical Genealogies. Similar Genealogies are most valuable 
allies to the Student of History, when his attention is directed to 



GENEALOaiBS. 423 

the claim of Edward III. to the Crown of France ; or when he 
is reading the record of the struggles between Stephen and 
Matilda ; or when he desires to see very clearly what was the 
relationship between Mary Stuart and Lord Darnley ; or how 
far Elizabeth of York had in her own person a title to the 
Crown ; or the relative positions of Mary and Jane Grey, and 
those of James I. and his unhappy kinswoman, Arabella Stuart. 
Various other examples will readily occur to the student of 
English History. 

The heraldic laws of exact definition, simple statement, and 
rigid conciseness, have full force in the arrangement and drawing 
up of Genealogies. The system which the student may adopt 
with advantage may be briefly explained. The materials which 
are to be used for the formation of any historical Genealogy 
consist, first, of notes of the facts that are to be set forth in it, 
and secondly, of a recognized series of abbreviations and signs. 
The notes will always comprise the names of every person who 
is to take a part in the Genealogy, with all dates and every 
circumstance that it may be desirable to record. 

The following abbreviations and signs have been found to 
work well: Son, son of: dau,, daughter of: 8, and H., son and 
heir of: dau, and H,, or co/i., daughter and heiress, or co- 
heiress : TT., wife of: Jtf., was married : =, placed between their 
names, signifies that the two persons specified were husband and 

wife: ^ signifies that such persons had children: i under 

any name, signifies that the person had children : 8. P., (sine 
prole), without children : F. P. {vitdpatri$)y in his, or her &amp;ther'8 
lifetime; d, died, at and on: 6tt., was buried at: man,, has a 
monument still existing : eff,, has a monumental e£5gy : k., killed 
in battle: esc., executed: murd,, murdered: 5an., banished: oo., 
accession, or came to the crown : cr,, coronation, or crowned : 
dep., deposed : K., King : Q., Queen : P. and Pm., Prince and 
Princess : Arehbp. and Bp., Archbishop and Bishop : D. and Dm. 



424 GENKALOGIEB. 

Duke and Ducheas: E., Cif., CW., Earl, Count, and Countess 
Ba., Bn88., Baron, Baroness : 1x2., Lord : Ly.^ Lady : KL^ Knight 
P/., riantagenet: I\i., Tudor: Ski., Stuart: La,, Lancastrian 
7k., Yorkist : W. A., Westminster Abbey : Cath., Cathedral : C%., 
Church : JJb,, Abbey. 

In arranging a Genealogy, the main line of descent is to be 
indicated by keeping the successive names in a vertical edumn. 
All persons of the same generation are to have their names m 
the 9ame horizontal Une. Spaces of equal depth are to be allotted 
to each generation. The members of the same fiunily are to be 
arranged in (heir order ofhirth in two groups, the sons first, (hen the 
daughters, each series commencing from the heraldic dexter side 
of the paper. Should it be necessaiy especially to denote that 
any individual is the eldest, or the second, or any other son, 
this may be done by placing the heraldic mark of Cadency aver (he 
name, Ckmtinuom Lines carry on and denote the descent, and the 
formation, and the connection of the families ; and, in placing 
these Lines, great care must be taken, lest a connecting line 
should point to any name not included in the order of blood- 
relationship. Li extended Genealogies, distinct groups, (as 
Lancastrians and Yorkists), may be indicated by inks of different 
colours; Boyal personages may have their names in peculiAr 
letters ; and the direct line of descent and succession may alao 
be indicated by capital letters, with initials in red. Badges may 
advantageously be placed with the names, as may tJudds of arwu 
in some instances; other shields and heraldic insignia, with 
references, &amp;c., may be placed in the margin. The figures 1 and 
2 may be introduced to denote first and second marriages : and, in 
like manner, any simple expedient may be adopted that may 
express a circumstance necessary to be indicated and observed. 
It will be noted, that the rule for arranging the names o 
brothers and sisters does not exclude the heir from occupying a 
central position in the vertical column of succession; also, that 
where the same father or mother may have families by more 



GBNEALOaiES. 425 

than one marriage, ^ children of each marriage are to form distinct 
groups. I must add, that the actual arrangement of any historical 
Genealogy must be detennined in a great measure by the leading 
object which it is intended to illustrate. Thus, I have arranged 
the accompanying brief example upon two different plans, each 
of them having its own especial aim. This example is a portion 
of the Boyal Genealogy of England. It traces the descent of 
James I. upwards for four generations; and it indicates the 
blood-relationship that existed between the parents of that 
prince, and shows his own relative position with reference to 
both his predecessor on the English throne, and his kinswoman, 
Arabella Stuart. My Genealogy, No, 1, treats of the first 
Stuart Sovereign of Great Britain as the descendant of the 
TuDORS, and as their heir and representative ; but in No. 2, he 
appears as the representative of the Stuarts who, happening also 
to represent the Tudors, became the heir of both those Hoyal 
Houses. The same historical teaching is conveyed by both 
Genealogies, of which No. 1 takes the English view, while in 
No. 2 the Scottish aspect of the subject is taken. In No. 1 the 
relationship between Elizabeth and Mart Queen of Soots is 
shown, and also that between Elizabeth (and therefore between 
her sister. Mart,) and Lady Jane Gret. The space at my 
disposal has compelled me to omit many details, and in No. 2 
I have given the names only : still these genealogiccd sketches 
may serve to exemplify the system for forming historical Gene- 
alogies. Of course, these sketches might be rendered more 
graphic by the use of coloured inks, and by the addition of 
fields of Arms and Badges. See pages 426, 427. 



426 



GiilNEALOGli^ 




11^ 






See page 425. 




GENEALOGIES. 



427 



o 

o 



V 



i 

J: 



1-51 



I 
I 



^1 r^^i 
II ' II-' 



is a— I ^ 




See page 425. 




No. 299.— Arms of the Dukb of Norfolk, the Eabl Mamwat^ fjom the 
Shield blazoned in the Heralds' College. See p. 168. 



CHAPTEB XXVIL 

PRECEDENCE. 

The Order of Precedence, a matter of no inconsiderable im- 
portance in a highly civilized and equally complicated condition 
of society, was first established upon a definite system by a 
statute of Henbt YIII., in 1539. Yarions subsequent r^nla- 
tions have taken effect, and haye contributed, in connection with 
Boyal Letters Patent, to produce the Precedence now regarded 
as established and practically in force amongst us. 

This order of Precedence may be considered to be based upon 
the following fourfold principle; first, that persons of evory 
degree of rank, except descendants of the blood royal, who 
always have precedence, should take place according to the 
seniority of the creation of such rank; secondly, that the 



PRECEDENCE. 429 

jODXiger Bona of each preoeding degree of rank should take place 
immediately after the eldest son of the next sncoeeding rank ; 
thirdly, that in certain cases the tenure of office should con- 
stitute actual rank so long as such tenure should continue ; and, 
lastly, that while a married woman participates in her husband's 
rank, (though not always in his official rank), the same pre- 
cedence is due to all the daughters of a family that is enjoyed by 
the eldest son of that family. 

The Order of Precedence. 

The SoYEREiaN. 

The Prince of Wales. 

The Sovereign's Younger Sons. 

The Soyereign's Qrandsons. 

The Sovereign's Uncles. 

The Sovereign's Cousins. 

The Archbishop of Canterbury. 

The Lord Chancellor. 

The Archbishop of York. 

The Archbishop of Armagh. 

The Archbishop of Dublin. 

The Lord High Treasurer, (now represented by the " Lords 
of the Treasury," of whom the " First Lord" is popularly 
entitled the " Prime Minister.") 

The Lord President of the Council. 

The Lord Privy Seal. 

These great Officers of State precede all Peers of their own 
Degree, (that is, if Dukes, they rank above all other -Dukes; if 
Earls, in like manner, &amp;o.), in the following order : — 

The Lord Great Chamberlain. (When in the actual per- 
formance of official duty.) 

The Lord High Constable. 

The Earl Marshal. 



480 PRBCKDENCE. 

The Lord Steward of the Queen's Household. 
The Lord Chamberlain of the Queen's Household. 
The Secretaries of State. 

Then the Peers aocording to their Patents of Creation : — 
The Dukes. 
The Marquesses. 
The eldest Sons of Dukes. 
The Earls. 

The eldest Sons of Marquesses. 
The younger Sons of Dukes. 
The Viscounts. 
The eldest Sons of Earls. 
The younger Sons of Marquesses. 
The Bishops of London, Durham, and Winchester. 
The Bishops aocording to seniority of Consecration. 
The Barons. 

The Speaker of the House of Commons. 
The Treasurer and the Comptroller of the Royal Household. 
The Master of the Horse. 

The Secretaries of State, being under the degree of Barons. 
The eldest Sons of Viscounts. 
The younger Sons of Earls. 
The eldest Sons of Barons. 

The Knights of the Garter, the Thistle, and St. Patrick, (not 
being Peers). 

The Privy Counsellors. 

The Chancellor of the Exchequer. 

The Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster. 

The Lord Chief Justice of the Queen's Bench. 

The Master of the Rolls. 

The Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas. 

The Lord Chief Baron of the Exchequer. 

The Judge Ordinary. 

The Lords Justices of Chancery. 



PRECEDENCE. 481 

The Vice Cliancellors. 

The Judges of the Queen *s Bench and Common Pleas. 

The Barons of the Exchequer. 

The younger Sons of Viscounts. 

The younger Sons of Barons. 

The Baronets. 

The Knights Grand Crosses of the Bath. 

The Knights of the Star of India. 

The Knights Grand Crosses of St. Michael and St. George. 

Knights Commanders of the Bath and other Orders. 

Knights. 

Serjeant s-at-Law. 

Masters in Chancery and in Lunacy. 

Companions of the Bath and other Orders. 

Eldest Sons of the younger Sons of Peers. 

Eldest Sons of Baronets. 

Eldest Sons of Knights. 

Esquires: including 

Esquires to Knights of Orders of Knighthood; the eldest 
Sons of all the Sons of Viscounts and Barons, and the eldest 
Sons of all the younger Sons of Peers, and their eldest Sons in 
perpetual succession : 

The Sons of Baronets : 

Persons holding the Queen's Commission, whether in a civil, 
naval, or military capacity : 

Members of the Royal Academy of Arts : 

Barristers : 

Masters of Arts, and Bachelors of Law : 

Clergymen : 

Gentlemen. 

Before marriage. Women take Precedence by the rank of their 
father, and all the sisters of any family have the same degree. 
By marriage, women participate in the dignities of their hus- 



482 



PRECEDENCE. 



bands, except in the case of certain dignities that are strictly 
o£5cial ; bat the dignities of wives are not imparted by marriage 
to their husbands. 

Marriage with an inferior does not affect the Precedence that 
any woman may enjoy by birth or creation ; but the wife of any 
Peer always takes her rank from her husband. Women ennobled 
by marriage, retain their rank as widows; but, should they 
contract second marriages, that rank ceases, and their Precedence 
is thenceforward determined absolutely either by the rank of their 
second husbands, or by their own personal dignity of birth. 

The wife of the eldest son of any degree precedes the sisters 
of her husband, and also all other ladies of the same degree with 
them, such ladies having place immediately after the wives of 
their eldest brothers. This principle of Precedence obtains in 
all families of the same degree amongst themselves. 




^ IxH Fltt 



No. 627 A.^Badge of Bichabd II. 
From hiB Effigy at WeBtrnmster. (See p. 304.) 




No. 613.— HowjLBD Modern. See p. 434. 
CHAPTER XXVin. 

AUaMBMTATION AND ABATEMENT. 
SECTION I. 

AUGMENTATION. 

An ^* AugmerUaiion** I have defined to be '* an hononrable 
addition to an heraldic composition, which is complete and dis- 
tinct in itself, and conveys emphatically a definite signification 
of its own ;" (p. 93). In the olden time these Augmentations 
were granted, Camden tells ns, *^ same of mere grace and some of 
merit ;" and he instances the grant of the Arms of the Confessor 
to the Hollands and to Thomas Mowbrat, (see pp. 126, 153, and 
247), as examples of Augmentation by the '' mere grace " of King 
Hicuard II. ; bnt, on the contrary, Henry VIII., ** for merit," 
granted to Thomas, Duke of Norfolk, and his posterity, for his 
victory at Flodden Field, wherein King James IV. of Scotland 
was slain," September 9, 1513, as a commemorative Augmenta- 
tion, the Hoyal Shield of Scotland, having a demi-Uon only, which 
is pierced through the moM vM an arrow, to be charged upon the 
silver bend of Howard. The two shields of this noble House, 

2 F 



484 AUQMENTATION AND ABATEMENT. 

the one without, and the other with the Flodden Angmentation, 
may be severally distinguiflhed as Howard Andeni^ No. 394, 
PL XXXVIL, and HouHwd Modem, No. 613, p. 433. 

Differencing by Angmentation, even when the fresh acces- 
sions to a Shield have resulted from *' mere grace," is eminently 
historical in its character : and this association between Coat- 
armour and History thus affected in augmented Arms, neces- 
sarily becomes peculiarly interesting as well as decided and 
emphatic in the case of eveiy Angmentation which refers to some 
well-known event, or which arose out of some memorable 
incident. 

The Augmentations granted out of his *' mere grace " by 
Henbt YIIL to some of his Consorts are blazoned in pp. 309-10. 
Another most remarkable example, of an earlier period, is the 
Augmentation granted by Bicharo IL to his favourite, Robert 
de ViiSE, E.O., ninth Earl of Oxford, Marquess of Dublin and 
Duke of Ireland : az., three crowns or^ unOiin a hordure arg.^ being 
a differenced Coat of St. Edmund, to be borne quarterly with the 
Arms of de Yere. This Augmentation appears to have been 
regarded as the Amu of Ireland; (See Mr. J. Gouoh Nichol's 
Paper on the Earldom of Oxford in vol. ix. of ArehoeoL Journal,^ 
Again, to Thomas Manners, E.G., first Earl of Butland (grand* 
son of Anne Plantagenet, sister of Edward IV.), Henry VIII. 
granted a chief of France and England, — ^that is, quarierly 1 and 4, 
az., two Jleurs de lys or; 2 and 3, gu,, a lion of England. 1 add a 
small group of examples of augmented shields of Camden*s second 
division — ^that ** of merit :" — 

1. Pelham, an Augmentation quarterly, in commemoration of 
the capture of John, King of France, at Poictiers, by Sir Wilu am 
Pelham I'-gu., two demi-helt8 palewise, in feeee, (heir hneklea m cUe/^ 
org., in the 2 and 3 quarters with Pelham — (ur., three pelicans arg.^ 
mining ihemedvee ppr., No. 132 c, p. 436. 

2. WoDEHOusE, Baron Wodehouse, in Memory of Aginooort : — 
9CL, a chevron or gonUee du sang, between three cinqurfoiU erm. .* 



AUGMENTATION AND ABATEMENT. 485 

Crest, a dexter hand issuing from clouds^ holding a dub, aB ppr,, en- 
signed with ike MoUOj ** Frajppez fori ;" below the shield the word, 
** Azincourt.** 

3. SooTT of Thirlfltane (a.d. 1542 :) the Boyal tressure of Scot- 
land, charged upon afield or ; on a bend az,, between tu)o crescents 
a mullet gold; Crest, *' a bundle of lances, with the words, ^^Beady, 
aye Beady,* " 

Many other Scottish shields, in like manner, are augmented 
with the Bojal tressnre : as those of Gordon, Fleming, Living- 
stone, Maitland, Montgomery, Chabteris, Primrose, Bellenden, 
and others: (See Seton, p. 451). 

4. Sir John Clarke, on his taking the Duke of Lonqueville 
at the *' Battle of Spurs,*' near Theronenne, (24 days before 
Flodden, Aug. 16, 1513) : the arms of the captored Dnke, to be 
charged on a sinister canton upon the paternal shield of Sir 
John, — on a sin. canton az., a demi-ram salieni org., armed or ; in 
chief twofleurs de lys gold, over aU a baton dexter : and for Clarke, 
org., on a bend gu., between three pellets, as many swans, ppr, 

5. Lane of Bently, Staffordshire, in memory of the escape of 
Charles II., after Worcester, through the devoted courage of 
Jane Lane : on the shield of Lane, per /eme or and az,, a chevron 
gu., between three mviUets counierchanged, a canton of England : Crest, 
a strawberry-roan horse salient, couped at the flanks, bridled so., bitted 
and garnished or, supporting between his feet a regal crown. 

6. Keith, Earl of Eintore, (a.d. 1677), in remembrance of the 
safe keeping and restoration of the Scottish Begalia : — quarterly, 
1 and 4, gu., a sceptre and sword in saltire, with an imperial crown 
in chief, within an orle of thistles or; with 2 and 3, arg,, a chief 
paly of six or and gu. 

7. Sir Cloudeslet Shovel, (a.d. 1692,) to commemorate two 
naval victories over the Turks and one over the French ;—gu,, a 
chevron erm., augmented with, tn chief, two crescents, and, in base, a 
fleur-de-lys or. 

8. John Churchill, E.G., first Duke of Marlborough: — an 

2 F 2 



436 



ABATEMENT. 



inescutcheon of St George, charged with another of France Modem ; 
No. 615, p. 439, and Chap. XXXI. 

9. Richard, Marquess Wellesley, K.G., K.P. : — an inescutcheon 
of Mysore, that is, purpure, an estode vert, bordered and radiated or, 
between eight stripes of the royal tiger of Tippoo SuUaun, saltire-wise, 
gold ; with other appropriate Augmentations to his Crests and 
Supporters. 

10. Arthur Wellesley, K.G., first Duke of Welungton : ilii 
inescutcheon of England ; No. 614, p. 439, and Chap. XXXI. 

11. William Carnegie, seventh Earl of Northesk: In chief, 
the word Trafalgar, and upon the breast of the Carnegie eagle a 
naval crown. 

Amongst the noblest Augmentations '' for merit," may be 
numbered accessions of fresh " Honours," to the Colours of our 
Regiments, and every " Clasp " that is added to ihe Medals of 
our sailors and soldiers; (See pp. 291 and 352). 




No. 132 a— Pelham. See p. 434. 



SECTION II. 



ABATEMENT. 



The term Abatement first appears in the heraldic writings of 
the sixteenth century, and it is then assigned to certain marks 
said to be designed to indicate the reverse of honourable Aug- 
mentations. In practice any such thing as an heraldic Abate- 
ment is unknown, with the sole exception of the distinctions 
adopted for the purpose of indicating illegitimate descent. 

In modem Heraldry, the Abatement of Illegitimacy that has 



ABATEMENT. 437 

been generally recognized, is a hendlet or haJton sinister : and ibis 
bendlet is represented as conped at its extremities, so tbat it does 
not extend across tbe entire field of any sbield. But tbe early 
Heralds, wbatever tbeir feelings may have been upon this point, 
certainly never promulgated as a law of heraldic usage any par- 
ticular difference that should distinguish the arms of persons 
not of legitimate birth, or those of the descendants of such 
persons. It would appear, indeed, that this Abatement was 
generally if not always determined in accordance with the 
wishes of different individuals. Some Abatement of illegitimacy 
was held and admitted to be necessary ; and provided that the 
Abatement appeared on the shield, it might assume whatever 
form might be considered best suited to each particular occa- 
sion. Two or three early examples will illustrate the practice of 
the old Heralds with sufficient clearness. 

Sir KooER DE Clarendon, son of the Black Prince, bore, cty on 
a hefnd sa., three ostrich feathers, labeUed, org. His near kinsman, 
the son of John of Ghent, John de Beaufort, before the Act of 
Legitimation in 1397, bore a somewhat similar parody of the 
arms of his father — a similar parody, at any rate, of the second 
and third quarters of his father*s shield, retaining his label : per 
jpcde arg. and az.y on a bend gu., three lions of England, ensigned with 
a label of France, The tinctures of the field, argent and azure, 
were the Livery Colours of the Lancastrian Plantaoenets. John 
DE Beaufort afterwards retained these same tinctures in his 
bordure compony : see p. 248. Sir John de Clarence, son of 
Thomas, Duke of Clarence, (himself the son of Henry IV.), 
bore, per chenron gu. and az,^ in chief two lions counter-rampant, and 
in base a fleur-de-lys, aU or. Glover gives as the arms of a 
natural son of one of the Fitz-Alans, Ralph de Arundel, a shield 
of Fiiz-Alan, Jlanched arg. : that is, a shield org., having flanches of 
Fiiz-Alan and Warrenne quarterly, as they were quartered by the 
Earls; No. 622, p. 438. 

The baton sinister was borne by Arthur, Viscount Lisle, son of 
Edward IV. : by Hknry, Duke of Richmond, son of Henry VIII. ; 



488 



ABATEMENT. 



and by GniRLEs Somerset, Earl of Worcester, son of Henbt 
Beaufort, third Duke of Somerset. The seal of this Charles 
Somerset shows that his baton crossed his qnartered arms, but 
was conped by his bordare : the baton itself is plain and very 
narrow. The eldest son of this Earl removed his father's baton 
from his arms, and charged Beaufort npon a fesse on a silver 
shield, thus recognizing the heraldic propriety of retainii^ an 
Abatement, though rejecting the baton. The arms of the 
natural sons of Charles II. were all abated with the baton 
sinister, which was differenced after the manner of a label; 
except in the case of the Duke of Richmond, who differenced with 
a bordure. At the present day, the haUm of the Duke of St. 
Alran's is, gu.^ charged vnth three roses org. ; that of the Duke of 
Cleveland is, ermine ; and the baton of the Duke of Grafton iB, 
compony org. and az. The Duke of Richmord bears the arms of 
Charles II., (No. 637, PL LVIII.), within a bordure con^onee org. 
and gu., charged with eight roses of the last^ barbed and seeded fpr. 
Except in instances such as these, in which the Abatement is 
charged upon the Boyal Arms, there appears no reason for trans- 
mitting the baton sinister with its peculiar signification ; in all 
less exceptional cases some mark of cadency might veiy pro- 
perly be substituted in its stead, or all traces of Abatement 
might be removed from their shields of arms by the descendants 
of persons, to whom arms had been granted abated with a sinister 
baton. 




No. 622.— Sir Ralph de Abundei^ p. 487. 





No. 614. — Abthub Welleslet, No. 615. — Spemceb Ohubchill, 

Duke of Wellinoton. Duke of Mablbobough. 

See pp. 435. 436 and 443. 



CHAPTER XXIX. 



MODERN HERALDRY. 

When not hiBtorical of the past, it is the office of all trne 
Heraldry to be historical for the future. Our Modem Heraldry, 
accordingly, if it would be consistent with both its character 
and its traditions, must take a becoming part in producing that 
Chapter of English History which we shall hand down to 
succeeding generations. It is indeed true that the state of 
things has undergone a marvellous change since Heraldry 
reigned in its full glory under the Flantagenets, and also since 
Henry VIII. held the assumption of the Arms of the Confessor 
by a Duke to be an overt act of high treason ; and yet the office 
of the Herald has by no means fallen into abeyance amongst 
ourselves. Our Heralds have still to record and to preserve the 
memory of both public and private Genealogies. They have to 
take note of the Succession of the Inheritors of old Titles, and 
of the oreation of new ones. They have to preside over and to 
confirm the Assumption and the Bearing of Armorial Insignia 



440 MODERN HERALDRY. 

of whatever kind : and all new Qrants of Arms come under their 
oognizanoe, and are enroUed in their College. They also direct 
all royal and national Solemnities and Pageants ; and they are at 
onoe the guardians and the exponents of the heraldic Records of 
their predecessors. 

In some]'particalars our Heraldry must inevitably suffer, when 
it is brought closely into contrast with the Heraldry of the 
olden time. For example, when Helms were really worn, and 
when Shields were in actual use, a Shield of Arms and a Crest 
had a significancy which now it is not possible for them to 
retain. We must be content to accept Shields and Crests as 
heraldic accessories, the bequest of the early Heralds, which we 
can only employ in reference to Heraldry itself. Shields and 
Crests, however, come to us possessing hereditary claims to 
recognition and acceptance in their heraldic capacity; and so 
we recognize and accept them. And, at the same time, we cer- 
tainly have it in our power to render our Heraldry both dignified 
and useful. We can adjust our Heraldry to early usage, as we 
must build it up upon early principles. We can reject any 
Heraldry that is not true as Heraldry, that does not accord with 
early precedent, and that is not also consistent with existing 
circumstances and associations. We are able to follow the ex- 
ample of the eai-ly Heralds, in adhering to sound heraldic role; 
in preserving the simplicity which distinguished the best 
Heraldiy of the past; in jealously maintaining the rule of 
Marshalling ; in adopting a judicious system of Cadency ; and 
in drawing a broad line of distinction between Arms that are 
borne hy righty and therefore have authority, and those which are 
either copied, or parodied, or improvised in accordance with the 
fancy or ^he capiice of unauthorized individuals. 

In blazoning heraldic devices which in a peculiar sense are 
of an histoncal character, it is important that true Coats of Arms 
should be clearly distinguished from Badges ; and, except under 
very special circumstanceH, it would be well to avoid charging 



MODERN HERALDRY. 441 

Badges upon shields. The general adoption and nse of Badges, 
however, aa Badges^ would be altc^ther consistent and right; 
and particularly whenever it now is customary to use a Crest 
for heraldic decoration, a Badge (which might be the same 
Charge or Device as the Crest) might be adopted in Modem 
Heraldry with good effect. I may adduce the heraldic jewellery, 
now much and deservedly in &amp;vour, as an illustration of the 
class of objects in which Badges might supersede Crests. The 
simplicity of the early compositions and their heraldic con- 
sistency ought always to be kept in remembrance. These are 
points that may be strongly urged upon all who are desirous to 
advocate the worthiness of Modem Heraldry. All pidaridl 
Heraldry, with the whole order of compositions that aspire to 
comprise within the limits of a single Shield both the greatest 
possible variety and the greatest possible number of Charges, 
must be resolutely excluded from our Heraldry. The historical 
value of the Heraldry of the new Palace at Westminster is most 
seriously prejudiced by the injudicious association of trae 
Shields of Arms with other Shields charged with devices, the 
aim and purpose of which I am not able to conjecture, but which 
certainly have no title to appear where they have been dis- 
played. The Peerage will supply illustrations of the style of 
composition that happily is passing away, but which must still 
be regarded as in some degree illustrative of modem Heraldry ; 
two examples of this class will be sufficient to act as warnings. 
The Arms granted to Horatio, Viscount Nelson, are blazoned 
in Sir Bernard Burke's Peerage after the following fashion : Or, 
a cross fleurie sa. a bend gu,, surnvmnied by another engrailed of (he 
field, charged with three bombs, fired, ppr, ; on a chief, (of honourable 
augmentation), undulated org., waxes of the sea, from u^ich a palm- 
tree issuant, between a disabled ship on the dexter, and a battery in 
ruins on the sinister, aU ppr. Crests : on the dexter, (as a Crest of 
Honourable Augmentation), or, the chdengh, or plume of triumph, 
presented to Horatio, Viscount Nelson, by the Grand Signior or Sultan, 



442 MODERN HERALDRY. 

Sdim III. ; and on the tmister, (the family Crest), on a ufreaA of 
the coUmra^ ujpon voanea of (he sea (he siera of a SpanUh man-o/wari 
aU fpr.^ thereon inecribed^ '' San Joeeff" The sailor and the lion 
which form the Supporters are not so bad ; but what ideas of 
Heraldry could have been entertained by those who devised the 
Nelson Crest, and placed ** waves of the sea " and the stem of a 
Spanish line-of-batUe ship upon a Helm? The Anns granted to 
OenenU, Sir Edward Ebrrison, which are thus blazoned, require 
no comment whatever : Or,^ a pUe az,^ charged wUh three gai^rc^ 
of the JiM : the augmenMion foUowing^ on a chief enibatded erm^ 
a wreath of laurei^ endrcUng a sword erect ppr.^ pommd and }3t 
goldf between on the dexter^ pendent from a ribbon gu,^ fimbriated of 
the second^ a repreaenUUion ofihe gold medal presented to Sir Educard 
for his services at ihe batUe ofOrthes, beneaih it the word ''(hikes!' 
in letters sa. ; and on Oie sinister^ pendent from a Uke ribbon^ a repre- 
serUation of the silver medal presented to him in cammemoratian cfhu 
services at O^e batOe of Waterloo^ beneath it ihe word " Waterioo,'' tn 
letters cdso so, 

Mr. Settok {Scottish Heraldry^ p. 134), has treated the " Heraldic 
Debasement " of modem times after a fashion which must rejoice 
the heart of every trae Herald.. Had my space permitted, 1 
would gladly have quoted from his pages at considerable length 
upon this matter, so cordially do I sympathize with his indig- 
nant vindication of the '* noble science :" I must be content, 
however, to borrow from him a single specimen of the ''fright- 
ful perversions" which he lashes with just severity. *'The 
following Arms, granted in 1760, to the faxajly of Teilow, 
seated at Haughton in Lancashire," says Mr. Seton, '* are as- 
suredly a delightful specimen : Azure, on a fess argent, fiee 
musical lines sable, thereon a rose gules, between two escallops 
of the last ; in chief, a nag*s head erased of the second, between 
two crosslets or ; in base a harp of the last. Crest : on a wreath, 
a book erect gules, clasped and ornamented or, thereon a silver 
penny t on which is written the Lord's Prayer ; on the top of the 



MODERN HERi^LDBT. 443 

book a dove proper, in its beak a erouhquiU sable. Motto: 
" PrcBmium virHUis Honor /" It appears that the hero jpor exce^ 
lence of the f&amp;mily once accomplished some such an achievement 
in penmanship, as is indicated in this Tetlow Crest. 

The Augmentations of Honour that grace the Shields of the 
two great military Dukes, Welunqton and Mablbobough, are 
such as the old Heralds would have devised. The Insignia of 
the United Kingdom, and a Shield of France charged upon 
another bearing the Cross of St. George, when blazoned in 
pretence on the honour point hj the two Dukes, are as signifi- 
cant and expressive as the Howard Shield of the days of Flodden, 
or as the quartered Shield of Edwabd III. himself; see Nos. 
613, 614, 615, and also 286. In the first and fourth quarters 
the Duke of Mablbobouqh marshals the Arms granted to the 
first Duke of his name, Churchill, and here the Cross of St. 
George appears on a canton ; see pages 435 and 439. 

In modem Heraldry Cadency is but little used, since its 
operation is almost superseded by the simple process of assuming 
arms without any shadow of claim to them, beyond such claim 
as is supposed to exist through the &amp;ct of bearing a particular 
name. In early Heraldry distinctions were carefully marked in 
the arms borne by members of the same fionily, who had in 
common the same name. Now, on the contrary, when a person 
determines to have " arms," he looks out his own name in an 
armory, and the arms he chances to find assigned to some one 
having the same name he forthwith assumes and uses as his own. 
Or he may obtain assistance, and his own consciousness of 
heraldic inexperience may be satisfactorily set at rest by gentle- 
men who, for a consideration, and a very trifling consideration 
ioOfJhd arma for hesitating aspirants to heraldic honours. The 
value of ''arms" that are ''found" on payment of ^prtain 
shillings, under the guidance of a surname correctly spelt and 
legibly written, is precisely the same as the value of those which 
Messrs. A, B, and C may so easily find for themselves ; or, if 



444 MODERN HERALDRY. 

they should happen to be of an imaginative turn of mind, which 
they may amuse their leisure by devising on their own accoimt. 

It is indeed true that every one is at liberty to call anything 
whatever his *' arms/' as he may determine either the colour and 
fiuhion of his costume, or the shape of his house ; but, neverthe- 
less, the Heralds' College still exists, and is the fountain head of 
true Heraldry ; and, until it is true to itself. Modem Heraldiy 
must continue to be but a degenerate representative of what 
Heraldry was about half a thousand years ago, when the mar- 
riage of a Prince of Wales was an event that for the first time 
took place in England. 

There is one ooeasion on which in our own times a public 
display of heraldic blazonry is expected, and when accordingly 
such a display is regularly made. I refer to the practice of 
placing Hatchments upon the residences that had been occupied 
by personages of eminence and distinction, at the time of their 
decease. The rules that have been adopted for the compositioii 
of these Hatchments I have described at page 108. I now 
advert to these funereal displays, because so very generally they 
are both conceived and executed in the worst possible taste, 
and in a style that might be supposed to aim at demonstrating 
the impossibility of any alliance between Art and Heraldry. 
Probably the cbctual shield that is charged upon any hatch- 
ment may be heraldically correct in its marshalling, and also 
in its blazonry; the favourite accessories, however, of these 
shields, with rare exceptions, are such as the early Heralds 
would have regarded with indignant surprise. Shields hideous 
in outline, and rendered still more offensive by what I suppose 
is intended to be accepted as ornamentation, the most execrahle 
scroll-work, with ribbons as bad in their own way and, to crown 
the whole, those painful winged infantine heads that are at once 
so absurd and so offensive, but too commonly are the charac- 
teristics of modem hatchment-painting. I have engraved an 
average specimen. No. 616, because I have felt unable in un- 



MODERN HERALDRY. 



446 



assisted words to do full justice to these outrages upon Heraldry. 
May I venture to hope for support from all who love the Herald's 
Art, when I claim for Modem Heraldry immunity from such 
systematic efforts to render it contemptible? Dignified hatch- 




No. 616.— Hatchment 
The Middle of the Nineteenth Century. — Abatement of Heraldry. 

ments may be produced with ease by any true Herald; and 
without doubt the services of a true Herald may always be 
secured, when the production of a really dignified composition 
of this class may be required. 

And so also in all other matters connected with the practical 
working of Heraldry in our own times, we now are fully com- 
petent to emulate the example bequeathed to us from **the 
brave days of old.'* We have already learned to form a just 
estimate of both heraldic debasement and heraldic dignity, and 
a better feeling for a true and a noble Heraldry is beginning 



446 MODERN HERALDRY. 

to prevail. Heraldiy is popular too; and, aooordingly, I am 
BTifficiently sanguine to look for such an henddio revival, as wiU 
cause Modem Heraldiy and good Heraldry to become inter- 
changeable terms. (See Cbap. XXX.) 

As examples of very recent Grants of Arms, which have 
passed through my own hands from the Heralds' College on their 
way eastwards, I have added to my Illustrations the Armorial 
Insignia now borne by authority by two subjects of Her Majesty, 
who are natives of India, both of them men of wealth and 
influence and also of munificent liberality, magistrates, and 
fellows of the University of Bombay. These arms, with those 
of a third native gentleman of India, in every respect equally 
worthy, as a British subject, to bear Armorial Insignia, I 
now describe. I must add that in their religion these gen- 
tlemen, to use the expression used by themselves, are Zoroafi- 
trians. 

Mr. MuNQULDASS NuTHOOBHOY, of Girgaum House, Bombay, is a 
banker in that city : he bears, — arg.^ enmroned by two nckles inter- 
laced^ a garb of ripe rice aU jppr, ; ona chief indented az,^ between two 
bezamta, a mullet or: Crest, — on a mound vert an d^phant etatant^ 
holding in his trunk a palm4franch all ppr,^ charged on hie tide with 
two mullets infesseor: Motto,—" Wisdom above Riches;'' No. 723, 
p. 432. 

Mr. CowASJEB Jehanohier, of Bombay, bears, — a«., wiOUn an 
orle of eight muUets, the sun in splendour or ; ona canton arg.^ the 
rose of England and the lotus of India in saltire ppr. : Crest,— on a 
mound vert,, a lao pillar, (he base and capital masoned, flames of fire 
issuing therefrom : Mottoes, — ^** My Life is His who gave it,'' and 
above the Crest, " Burning I shine ;" No. 724. 

Mr. CuRZETJEE Furdoonjuieu Paruk, of Bombay, bears, — arg^ 
a chevron gu,, between three ancient galleys sa. ; ona chief az., between 
two estoHes, the sun in splendour or : Crest, — on a mound vert, a winged 
lion passant or, charged on the shoulder with an estoUe az., and behind 
him a palm-tree ppr. : Motto, — " A good Conscience is a sure Defence^' 



^v^ 



MODERN H£RALDBT. 



447 



These ancient galleys and the winged lion refer to the early 
migration of the Farsees of India from Persia, as the rice-garb 
and sickles may be supposed to denote the former agricultural 
avocations of the fetmily of the Bombay banker. 




Ka 724. — CowASJBE Jehanobikb, of Bombay. 




No. 617.— Pommel ot the Sword-hilt of the Black Princse : 
Oanterhnry Cathedral 



CHAPTER XXX. 

HERALDIC TREATMENT, DRAWING, AND COLOUR. 

I BELIE7E it to be a prevaleDt misappreliension, either that 
no early Heraldry has any title to be regarded as an Art, or 
that in its artistic capacity all early Heraldry is alike. The 
student who desires thoroughly to understand the Heraldry of 
the olden time, will speedily discover that very many of the 
Heralds who flourished some centuries ago were true Artists ; 
nor will he be long before his attention is attracted to the 
marked differences in heraldic Style and Treatment which dis- 
tinguish the armorial insignia of different periods. In fact^ ihe 
Art of Medisdval Heraldry attained to its highest excellence, and 
it declined and sunk down to a condition of lowly humility, con. 
temporaneously with the Art of Architecture, and with the 
other Arts of the middle ages. A series of heraldic Seals, 
ranging in their dates from 1300 to 1550, will very clearly 
elucidate this statement. Or an heraldic monument of the time 
of Edward I., compared with others severally of the eras of 
Edward III., Henry VI., Henry VIII., and Jambs I., will be 



HERALDIC TREATMENT. 449 

equally explicit in illustrating the progress of Heraldic Art. 
And, again, much may be learned through a comparison con- 
ducted within much narrower limits. Thus, the Brasses to 
Alianore de Bohun, a,d. 1399, at Westminster, and to Lady 
TiPTOFT, A.D. 1446, at Enfield, show how striking is the difference 
in heraldic Art that at that period was produced by the lapse of 
half a century. The two memorials resemble each other very 
closely even in minute particulars of composition and arrange- 
ment; and yet in treatment and in Artrfeeling it is scarcely 
possible that any two works of the same order should exhibit 
more decidedly marked differences. These differences extend to 
the forms of the shields, and their adjustment to the canopies of 
the two Brasses. In PL XVH I have given faithful represen- 
tations of the Tiptoft shields and lions, which may be compared 
with those in PL XX., dnd at page 253 ; and the effect of this 
cojnparison will be confirmed by extending it to the earlier 
shields engraved at pages 61 and 89. 

The study of early Heraldry will enable the student, perhaps 
to his surprise, but certainly to his gratification, to determine 
at least the approximate period of any Shield of Arms, with 
almost as certain accuracy as an archaeological architect is able 
to read dates in chisel-cut mouldings. The conventional system 
of treatment adopted by the early heraldic Artists, when care- 
fully considered under the different aspects which it assumed at 
different periods, will also enable us to develop for ourselves 
such a style of heraldic Art as may be consistent with the 
general condition of Art in our own era, while at the same 
time it harmonizes with the best and most artistic Heraldry of 
the past. 

The really important consideration for us is, that our Style 
should be at once our oum, and also in itself equally true to Art and 
to Heraldry. If we assign a due measure of our regard, on the 
one hand to the requirements of modem Art, aud on the other 
hand to the authority of early Heraldry, we may confidently 

2 o 



450 HERALDIC TBEATMENT. 

anticipate complete sacoess. Rejecting the idea that the Art of 
all early Heraldry is of equal authority, we must take as our 
guide only the early Heraldry of the^ best and most artistic 
period — that is, before 1450; and having thus determined what 
early Heraldry we may most advantageously study, we shall 
conduct our inquiries in the spirit of Artists, and not as 
imitators merely and copyists. We must aspire higher than 
to succeed in reproducing even the best early heraldic oomposi- 
tions. 

A certain degree of Conventionalism will be necessaiy in our 
treatment of all heraldic figures and objects ; but this oonven- 
tionalism imposes no restrictions upon our freedom of design, 
and much less does it require a monotonous adherence to any 
particular type. Our Heraldry must repudiate interminable 
repetitions of the same composition or the same device, all 
exactly alike, as if they were cast from a single mould. Nor, 
because our designs must be conventional in some degree, is it 
at all requisite that they should be unnatural. Good drawing 
also must be a condition of our Heraldry ; so that oUr Lions may 
be well and artistically drawn, both thoroughly lionM and tho- 
roughly heraMicj and yet they may decidedly differ fix&gt;m snch 
figures of lions as we should expect to find in an illustnkted 
treatise on mammalia. The heraldic Lion is certainly the 
sovereign of the animals who take a part in the Herald's compo&gt; 
sitions ; and he is also the most difficult to treat I know no 
early examples superior to those that appear ready to spring out 
of their Shield at Beverley. The Lions &lt;rf the monuments of 
John of Eltham also, of the Black Prince, and of Edwakd III., 
are excellent heraldic lions ; their conventional ti-eatment^ bow- 
ever, is somewhat exaggerated. We may avoid such exaggeration, 
without either drawing lions as the Heralds of James I. ^wonld 
have drawn them, or reproducing the grotesque water-sponting 
feliwB of the majolica fountain in the 1862 Great Exhibition 
Those lions dcmsant disposed of strict naturalism in heraldic 





No. 712. 
BLATE LXX\^I. CHxjnEK xxx.. \^ 451 

No. 633. — Shield of Arms of the Abhey of St. Alban, witli the Supi^ortors ut 
^ Ah))ot Thomas Ramryge. 

No. 711.— Collar of one of the Ram Supporters. 
No. 712. — Hea&lt;l of one of the Ram Supporters. 
Frdin 41ie Mooumeiitul Chantry of Abbot Ramryge, in the Abbey Churrb, at 
•^ «^t, AIImvu'b : a1x&gt;ut a.d. 1500. See also p. 123. 



DRAWING AND COLOUR. 461 

animals. The Powya lionfl, Noa. 300 b, 300 c, PI. XVII., and 
364 A, PL XXni., dispose in no less peremptory a manner of 
pure conventionalism. 

At the head of this Chapter I have placed a small ont. No. 
617, representing the pommel of the sword-hilt that is scnlp- 
tured with the Effigy of the Black Prince at Canterbury, and 
which is charged with a most spirited representation of a lion's 
face, the face of a true heraldic Lion ; and at p. 340 there is a 
much earlier group of lions' faces, charged upon the shield of an 
effigy of a Knight, at Clehongre in Herefordshire. This is a 
splendid example of the monumental sculpture of the tiine of 
Edward II., about a.d. 1320 ; the Shield is barry of six, the 
bars being alternately carved in relief, and over all on a bend 
are the three lion's faces; No. 657, p. 379. 

The Barns that Abbot Bamrydqe of St. Alban's assumed and 
bore as his Supporters, and which are sculptured again and 
again upon his monumental chantry in his Abbey Church, with 
a freedom and boldness that cannot be described in terms of 
too decided admiration, may be accepted by modem Heralds as 
examples of heraldic animals, to be studied with thoughtful 
care, and followed with implicit reliance. The originals have 
all suffered in a greater or a lesser degree, some few of them 
having almost escaped the injuries that have very nearly 
destroyed others. In Plate LXXVIL I have represented one 
of the Shields supported by two rams, and ensigned with a rich 
coronet-like cap^ No. 633. The arms are those of the Abbey of 
St. Alban, a«., a saMre or. It will be observed that the sculptor 
has couped the extremities of the ordinary within the shield, 
and this he has done in every shfeld upon the monument. Some 
of these shields are ensigned with rich mitres, all of them now 
grievously mutilated; and in many instances two beautiful 
pastoral staves cross behind the shields in saltire, their shafts 
interpenetrating the mouldings of the panels and tracery. In 
addition to the ram-supporters, rams' heads are several times 

2 o 2 



452 HERALDIC TREATMENT. 

soiilptnred amongst the emaller decorations of Uiis beautifal 
memorial. No. 711, like the rest of the examples from St. Albans, 
carefiilly sketched from the original by the engraver bimseli^ 
represents one of these heads ; and in No. 712, PL LXXYII., 
the collar, with the letters btge, to complete the Abbot's obarac- 
teristic rebus, is shown at length. In his great delight in this 
rebus of his, the Abbot appears to have charged a ram rcmjp(ai 
upon his paternal shield of arms, as in No. 715, PL LXXYIII.: 
this same shield is more than once repeated, and sometimes it L&lt; 
impaled by the saltire of the Abbey. 

Amongst heraldic birds, the Eagle holds the same rank that 
the Lion maintains amongst beasts ; and the early Heralds evi- 
dently delighted to make their Eagles thoroughly heraldio. We 
may accept their style of Eagle drawing, while subjecting it 
to some little modification after what Natui*e has to teach n&amp;, 
Nos. 677, 678, PL LXXVI., shields severally charged with an 
eagle having a single head and a double-headed eagle, are 
taken from drawings of the period of Edward I. The Eagle of 
the Emperor, charged in relief upon the early shield in the 
north choir aisle of Westminster Abbey, is cast in the same 
mould ; it has a single head, and is not crowned : but at Great 
Yarmouth there is a similar eagle having two heads. One of 
the shields that were originally blazoned on the monument of 




No. 677 A. 
Earl William de Valence, No 677 a, places before us an excel- 



■^--a ^Jl i ^ ^^^^BP 




No. 713. 





No. 715. No. 714. 

PLATE LXXVIII. Chapter xxx., p. 451. 

Shields of Arms. — The Abbey Church op St. Alban. 

No. 714. - From tlic Monumental Chantiy of John de Wheathamstkde, 

33rtl Abbot of St. Alban's, a.d. 1421—1460. 

No«. 713, 715.— From the Monumental Cbantry of Thomas Uamrygf, 

37tli Abbot of St. Alban's. a.d. 1484—1524. 

Ste pp. 123. 451—453. 



DRAWING AND COLOUR. 458 

lent example of the Imperial Eagle having one head only. 
Another example, exaggerated in the drawing, but admirably 
Bculptured in alabaster, appears upon the monument of Prince 
Edmond of Langley, at King's Langley; No. 678 a, Chap. 
XX X I I. Again I refer to the moliumental chantry of Abbot 
Ramrydge, at St. Alban's, for a model specimen of both heraldic 
design and heraldic scnlpture. The shield bearing the eagle 
displayed, No. 713, PI. LXXVIII., will be sufficient to show 
the artistic feeling of the Heralds who flourished late in the 
Gothic era ; nothing can exceed the combined spirit and delicacy 
with which this sovereign of heraldic birds is executed. There 
are several other shields charged with eagles upon this monu- 
ment, in addition to this No. 713 ; one of them bears three eagles 
displayed, two and one. The date of Abbot Bamrtdoe's monument 
is 1524 ; it is an exception, therefore, and a truly noble one, to 
the style of Heraldry prevalent at its own era. 

Fleurs de lys of elegant form abound; I know no better 
examples than those upon the monument of Edward III. It is 
always desirable to seek for weU drawn and carefully executed 
examples of every Charge, and I commend this matter of 
heraldic Drawing to the careful consideration of students of 
Heraldry. As an illustration of the care bestowed by the early 
Heralds upon the treatment of every Oharge, I adduce one of 
the dusters of wheat-ears that he appears to have used as a Badge, 
from the monument of Abbot John of Wheathamstede, a.d. 1460, 
No. 717, p. 467. Upon a firieze of the chantry of this emiment 
ecclesiastic in St. Alban's Abbey, his Motto, (a rebus, like his 
badge,) is repeated, the Badge alternating with the words, valles 
ABOVNDABUNT. One of the shields upon the south side of this 
very interesting piece of monumental architecture is charged 
with three crowns, two and one; 1 engrave this Shield, No. 714, 
PI. LXXVIII., as a very beautiful early example of crowns 
having their circlets heightened with aUemate crosses patSes and 
fleurs de lys. Having mentioned Abbot John, I may add that in 



454 HERALDIC TREATMENT. 

the Churoh of Wheatbamstead, near St. Alban's, the Brass to tlie 
father and mother of the Abbot is preserved ; it has their anns, 
those of his mother, who was a Hetworth, being arg.^ three haU 
with winge extended sa. 

I must again refer to the tohUe harie of Richard II., in West- 
minster HaU, as models for the treatment of ftnimftlR of eTeiy 
kind in Heraldry (see p. 263) ; and, with them, to the admirably 
Boulptured Supporters of the Shields in King's Collie Chapel 
Cambridge. 
The practice of the early heraldic artists even in representing 
emUne'Spote we may stndy with decided 
advantage : in No. 721, 1 give two exam- 
ples of ermine-spots from early shields: 
A, from one of the smaller enamelled 
shields on the Monument of Edward HI., 
and B, from the effigy of Sir Robert du 
Bois, temp. Edw. I, at Fersfield, Norfolk. 
In our drawing of Helms and Shields, 

No. 721. since we no longer derive our ideas of 

Early Ermine-Bpots. , , . ^ , « , 

such objects from examples of them that 

are in actual use by ourselves, we are at liberty to select such 
varieties as may be most appropriate to the purposes for which 
we require them, and alsO those that are most pleasing in their 
forms. I have engraved several good and effective varieties of 
shields at pp. 13, 15, 61, and 230; the example which follows. 
No. 716, charged with the saltire of St. Alban, is finom the 
interior of the chantry chapel of Abbot Kamrtdqe. A somewhat 
similar Shield has been engraved at p. 230 : and I may refer to 
another of the same class above the monument to Sir John 
Spencer at Great Brigton. The unsightly and incanvenient 
Lozenge, I think, might be superseded in our Heraldry. Sim- 
plicity in Helms and Mantlings appears to be most desirable ; and 
Helms certainly may always be advantageously set in profile. 
Two fine examples of early Helms are represented in PJ. XLVIm 





DRAWINQ AND OOLOUB. 455 

No8. 611, 612, the former from the monument of the Black 
Prince, and the latter from the Stall-Plate of Ralph, Lord 




No. 716. 

Basset ; and with them may be associated, as a model heraldic 
helm. No. 264, p. 110. 

The Label that has its points formed after the early manner, 
as I have invariably drawn it, appears to be preferable to the 
later form in which the ends of the points or pendants are made 
to expand ; it is also always productive of a good effect that the 
Label itself should traverse the entire field of the shield from 
dexter to sinister. Modem Labels are generally oouped at both 
extremities, and their points are distorted into a species of 
dove-tailing. In No. 618 I give three varieties 



of the points of Labels : the first. A, is the 
early type ; the second, B, represents the tomi 



Tinr 

of the label introduced in the beginning of the s^=a^^sssnr==. 

sixteenth century ; and the third, G, is the a | \\ I \\ 

more modem form, which is altogether objeo- 

tionable. q / \ 7 \ 

In many early quartered shields the Quarter- ^^ ^^g 

ings are not indicated by any dividing lines, 

as in No. 486, p. 253 ; this is certainly an error, which we shall 
do well to avoid. 



456 HERALDIC TREATMENT. 

I here refer with cordial satisfaotion to two works, hoik of 
them rich in illustrations, which exemplify in a traly happy 
manner such Treatment and Drawing as students of Heraldzy 
may accept with confidence. Again I direct attention to a 
volume, already more than once quoted — Mr. Moule's EeraUnf 
ofFM, puhlished in 1842 hy Van Voorst. The wood-cuts, 205 
in numher, are engraved with singular feeling and effectiveness, 
the drawings themselves having all been made on the wood, as 
he tells us, *' under the Author's own inspection, by his daughter, 
Sophia Barbara Moule;" and of these drawings it may 1» 
affirmed that they possess every quality of genuine excellence 
and appropriate beauty. The other Work, which also is illus- 
trated in the true heraldic spirit, is Mr. Seton's Heraldry cf S^*- 
land. By way of contract, Students may turn from the illustra- 
tions of MouLE and Seton to those that have just appeared with 
Anecdotes of HerMry^ a little volume that would have been 
really useful, had it not been as destitute of arrangement, as it 
is of indexes, while it contains a numerous collection of engraved 
examples, all of them treated and drawn in exact oonfoimitj 
with the heraldic feeling and spirit that I have endeavoured to 
illustrate in the Baichment^ No. 616, p. 445. 

In the disposition and arrangement of Charges, and in the 
laws of Tincturing, the usage of the early Heralds may be accepted 
as our best guide. Perhaps we may enrich our compositions 
with less cautious and sparing hands than they did ; and cer- 
tainly we may emulate their system of Diapering both in surface- 
carving and in colour. Colours have been produced for us by 
the chemical science and the mechanical skill of our times, far 
superior both in hue and in variety of tint to anything that was 
known to the Heralds of the middle ages. It will be well for 
us to avail ourselves of our advantages, and to introduce into our 
blazon the most brilliant and lustrous colours. 

With the special view to provide for students of Heraldrj 
and amateur heraldic artists the very best materiel for their use, 
I have suggested the preparation of a box of heraldic gold and 



HERALDIC OOLOURIKO. 457 

colours, with drawing implements, that may satisfy their most 
{iEtstidious requirements ; and my suggestions have been carried 
into effect by Messrs, Winsar and Newton^ of Bathbone Place, my 
original publishers, in a manner that leaves nothing to be 
desired. I may add that the same materials are equally adapted 
for the use of professional Heralds, and of the artists who work 
under their immediate direction. 




No. 717.— Badge of Abbot John db Whbathamstedb, St. Alban*8 
Abbey, a.u. 1440. See p. 453. 




No. 667. No. 668. 

Shields from early Seals of 1&gt;b Nbtilub. See p. 4&lt;H. 



CHAPTEE XXXI. 

EXAMPLES OF SHIELDS OF ARMS. 

In this Chapter I place before Btudenta of Heraldry the blazon 
of a series of Shields of Arms, the greater number of them in 
addition to those that have been already described. The aeries 
comprehends the Arms of varioas historical Personages, together 
with those of several Families of eminence amongst ourselves at 
the present day. 



From the Eoll of Henry HI. : 

BiGOD, Earl of Norfolk : or, a cross gu. ; No. 639, PL LXXI. 

FiTZ Geoffrey : within a hordure ratr, quarterly or and gu. 

De L'Isle : or, a lion rampL gu. 

De Lucy : gu,, three lucies haurient in /esse org. 

De Mandeville and De Say : quarterly or and gu. 

Le Maresghal : per pale or and vert, a lion rampL gu. 

De Montfichet : gu., three chevronels or, a label az, 

De Segrave (Ancient) : so., three garbs or. 



EXAMPLES OF SHIELDS OF ARMS. 459 

From the Roll of Edwabd I. : 
Arragoji : or, three pallets gu, 
Chester : az,, ihree garbs or. 

L'EsTRANGE : gu.^ two lions pass, in pale aarg.^ within a hordure 
engrailed or ; No. 660, PI. LXII. ^ 

From the Boll of Caerlavekogk : 
D'Aubigny: gu,j a f esse eng, org. 
Anthony Bec : gu,,a cross moline (or recerceUe) erm, 
De Carew : or, three lions pass, in pale sa. 
L'Estranoe: gu., two lions pass, in pale arg. 
De Letburne : az.j six Uoncds, 3, 2, 1, arg. 
Dk Mohun : or, a cross eng. sa. 
De Montault : az., a lion rampt. or. 
De Multon : arg., three bars gu. 
De Perot : or, a lion rampt. az. 
FiTZ BooER : quarterly or and gu., a bend sa. 
De Toni : arg., a mHunche gu. 
Le Vavasour : or, a /esse dancette sa. 
FiTZ Walter : or, afesse between two chevrons gu. 
De Willoughby : or, fretiee sa. 

From the Boll of Edward II. : 
Blount : gu., afesse between six martlets arg, 
Fauconberg : org., a lion rampt. az. 
De la Mere: arg., on a bend sa., three eaglets vert. 
De Montfort : arg., crusHie gu., a lion rampt. az. 
De Montgomerie : or, an eagle disp. az. 
Bauf de Mortimer : or, an eagle ditm. vert. 

From the Calais Boll of Edward ILL : 
Burwash : or, a lion rampt. queue faurchSe gu. 
De Coua : barry of six vair and gu. 

De Holland (Ancient) : az., fleurettee, a lion rampt. guard, arg. ; 
No. 637, PI. LXV. 

Maltravkrs : sa.,/rettSe or. 



460 EXAMPLES OF 

FoTNiNGS : harry of sixer and vert^ over att a hend ffu. 

Badcliffe : arg., a bend eng. ea. 

Talbot : gu., a lion rampt. or : No. 662, PL LXII. 

D'Ufford : M., a cross eng, or. 

FiTZ Wabtn : quarterlgyer fesse indented carg. ixnd gn. 

From the Boll of Bichabd II. : 

AsTELEY : az,y a dnquefoU erm, pierced, 

Bagot : arg,f a chevron gu,^ between three martlets sa. 

Blount : barry nebuUe of eight or and so. 

BoTELER : €»., a bend arg,^ between six covered cups or : and, gn,, a 

fesse counter-componSe or and sa,, between six crosslets org, : also, az-i 

a chevron between six covered cups or, 

BuATBROK : arg,f seven masdes, 3, 3, and 1, gu, 

Gharlbton : or^ a lion rampt, so. 

Manners : or^ two bars az.^ a chief gu, 

BoKEBY : arg,y a chevron aa., between three rgoks ppr. 

Saint Am and : or, frettSe sa., on a chief of the last Ovree froEantt. 

De la Warre : gu.^ crusHee fitcheCy a lion rampt, or, armed az, 

De Wtlouohbt : quarterly , 1 and 4, sa,, a cross eng. or: 2andZ, 

gu,^ a cross moline org, 

Brandon : barry of ten org, and gu,, a Hon rampt or^ crowned per 
pale gold and of the second, 

De Creve(X£(jr : or, a cross gu., voided of thefidd, 

Deyereux : arg,y a fesse gu, in chief three torteaux. 

Dobell, of Sufisez : sa., a doe tripping, between three heUs org. 

Dudley : or, a lion rampt, cnteue fourchie vert, 

Glendour : paly of eight org, and gu,, over aU a lion rampt, so. 

Astley, Baron Hastings : az,, a cinguefoU erm,, toi^in a bordvre 
eng. or : No. 726. p. 229. 

Harpur Crewe, Bart^ : org,, a lion rampt,, within a hordure emj. 
sa: No. 727, p. 229. 

Molesworth, Bart. : vair, a bordure gu,, charged with crosslets or: 
No. 725, p. 229. 



SHIELDS OF ARMS. 



C?TA7TERS Yi. IX X\ ik XXXI 




i-lale ...\.A 



SHIELD6 OF ARMS. 461 

Henlinoton, of Gloucestershire : arg,^ a Idbd of five points az, 

Herox : OS., 0^ree herons^ two and one, org, ; and &lt;* the reverse." 

De Heriz, (afterwards Harris) : aa., three hedgehogs (French, 
*'A«fT»M&gt;n") aarg.; blazoned on the Shield of an E£Sgy of the 
period of Edward I. at Gonaldston, Notts. 

Neville (Ancient) : or^ frettSe gu,, on a canton so, an ancient ship 
gold, — in remembrance, of Gilbert de Neville, Wiluam the 
Conqueror's Admiral, No. 725, p. 461. 

Serqeaux, of Cornwall : org,, a saltire between four (or twelve) 
cherries (*' cerises ") gu,, slipped vert* 

Sydney : or^ a pheon az^ 

De Toplypfe : (Brass, a.d. 1391, at Topdiff, in Yorkshire,) arg., 
a chevron between three peg-tcps sa, ; No 682, Fl. LXIX. ^ 

Vernon: org., frettSe sa. 

Chaucer : per pale org, and gu., a bend comterchanged ; No. 680, 
n. LXIX. 

Gower: (monument at St Saviour's, Southwark, a.d. 1408), 
arg.y on a chevron az., three leopard's faces or; No. 681, PI. LXIX. 

Shakespeare, (granted 1546 :) Arms, — or, on a bend sa, a spear 
gold : Crest,— a falcon displayed arg., holding in its beak a spear in 
pale or; No. 679, PI. LXIX. 

MiLiX)N : org,, an eagle displayed with two heads gu., beaked and 
membered sa, 

Soorr : quarterly, 1 and 4, or, two mullets in chief, and a cres^ 
cent in base, az., wiAin an orle of ihe last, for Scott : 2 and 3, or, on 
a bend az., three masdes gold, in the sinister chirf point an oval buckle 
erect of the second, for Haliburton. 

Macaulay, Baron Magaulay : gu,, within a bordure eng. or, a 
pair of arrows saUire-wise, their points to the base, arg., surmounted by 
two barrvlets eompon^ gold and az.j between as many buckles in pale 
of the second. 

Wellesley, Duke of Wellington: quarterly, 1 and 4,gu,,a 
cross org., between five plates in saltire in each quarter, for Wellesley ; 
2 and 3, or, a lion rampt. gu., ducaUy gorged for Colley : as an aug- 
mentation, on the honour-point an inesculcheon charged toith the Union 



462 EXAMPLES OF 

Device of Oreat Britain and Irdand; No. 614, Chap. XXIX. 
(Garter-Plate.) 

Spencer Chubchill, Dttke of Marlboroitoh : qnarterly, 1 and 4, 
Ohurc?hill, «fl., a lion rampt. org,, on a canton of the second^ a enms 
gu. ; 2 and 3, Spencer, (No. 107) : as an aagmenUOUm^ on Ae 
honour-point an inesctdeheon of St, George, charged tn pretence with 
another of France Modem ; No. 615, Cbap. XXIX. 

Pelham Clinton, Duke of Newcastle: qnarteriy, 1 and 4, 
Clinton, (No. 400, PI. XXXVII) ; 2 and 3, quarterly, 1 and 4, 
&lt;K., three pelicans arg.y mdned ppr. ; 2 and 3, gu., two demi-bdts wttt 
buckles erect arg,, all for Pelham, No. 13fic., p. 436. 

Manners, Dnke of Kutland : or, two bars az. ; a ehi^, quarterly 
of the second and gu., charged in the alternate quarters with twofUsmrs 
de lys of France, and a lion of England. 

EussELL, Duke of Bedford : org,, a lion rampt, gu.; ana chi^wa^ 
three escallops of the first, 

Grauam, Duke of Montrose: quarterly, 1 and 4, Graham, 
(No. 409, PL XXVni); 2 and 3, for the title, Montrose, org,, 
three roses gu,, barbed and seeded ppr, 

Campbell, Duke of Argyll: quarterly, 1 and 4, Campbell^ 
(No 356, PI. XXIV.) ; 2 and 3, for the lordship of Lorn, org., a 
lymphad sa,, sails furled up, flag and pendants flying gu. 

Granville Leveson Gower, Duke of Suthfrland: quarterly, 
1 and 4, Gower, bcmry of eight arg, and gu., over aU a cross paionce 
sa, : 2 and 3, Leveson, No. 239, p. 70 : tn pretence, the shield cfthe 
ancient Earls of Sutherland, ensigned with the EarTs Coronet^ 
bearing gu., within a bordure or charged with a tressure of Scotland^ 
three mullets gold. The Duke of Sutherland also quarters Gran- 
ville, gu., three clarions or : Egerton, arg., a lion rampL gu., betufeen 
three pheons sa : Stanley, No. 205 a, PL XIV. : Brandon : Clif- 
ford, No. 373, PL XXV. : Strange or L'Estrange, without the 
hordure, and the Boyal Arms of the Tudors. 

Fitz-Gerald, Duke of Leinster : arg,, a saUire gu., being the 
armorial insignia of St. Patrick. 

SooTF, Earl of Eldon : arg., between two lion's heads erased gu.^ 



SHIELDS OF ARMS. 



463 



an anchor erect sa, ; on a chief wavy az,, a portcullis or, a mullet for 
difference, 

Erskine : arg.j a pale m. 

Stuart : or^ within a treasure of Scotland, a f esse chequSe arg, and 
az.; No. 620, PL LI I. 

Stuart of Bonhill : Stuart, the fesse surmounted by a bend gu,, 
charged mth three hucJdes gold, 

Stuart of Davingstone : or, within a hordure eng, gu., a fesse 
chequSe arg, and az. 

LiJiDSAY : gu., a fesse chequee org, and az, 

Pitt: sa,, a fesse chequSe arg, and az., between three bezants. 
This shield alludes to the oflBcial connection of the Pitt family 
with the Exchequer, as the same fesse was borne by the Stuarts 
in allusion to the chequered board of the High Stewards of 
Scotland. 

Seton : or, within a treasure of ScoUand, three crescents gu, ; No. 
625, PI. LII. 

Hepburn : gu., on a chevron arg. a rose between two lioncels rampt. 
of the field. 




No. 700.— Shield from an 

early Seal of St. John : 

see p. 405. 



No. 701. — Shield from an early 

Seal of St John, of Soseez ; 

see p. 405. 




No. 678 A.— Tho Emferob : Monument at King^a Luigley, a.d. 1402. 
See pages 890 and 453. 



CHAPTER XXXII. 



FOREIGN HEBALDBT. 



Foreign Heraldry differs chiefly from the Heraldry of our 
own Country in being less severe in its prevailing style, and 
less exact in its details and usages, but more elaborate and 
gorgeous in both the character and the treatment of its compo- 
sitions. The Heraldry of Germany, in particular, is veiy 
splendid; and, in accordance with the German sentiment of 
modem times, it indulges in an almost infinite variety of subor&gt; 
dinate details, elaborate combinations, and subtle distinctions. 
The Heraldry of France also is rich, and often fanciful, and yet 
almost always eminently artistic. I have already given, in 
the preceding chapters, the blazon of a numerous series of foreign 
Shields, all of them in some degree associated with the Armory 
of England ; so that in this present Chapter it remains for me to 
do little more than briefly to notice some characteristic usages of 



FOREIGN HERALDRY. 465 

V 

Foreign Heraldry, and to blazon a few other examples to which 
reference has not yet been made. 

In Foreign Heraldry a free use is made of Shields of Arms for 
the purpose of decoration, whereas this nse of heraldic decorative 
accessories is rare in England. Thus, there are small Shields of 
his Arms sem^ over the bardings of the charger of John, King 
of Bohemia, who fell at Cresci (in his Seal) ; and the King him- 
self has as his Crest the two wings of a vulture, spread and of 
very large dimensions. The Effigy of Earl Wm. de Valence is 
an example of this method of decoration, but it is the work of a 
foreign artist. 

The Shield which is represented in foreign Military Effigies, 
is almost invariably placed in front of the figure, and in such a 
position that its base is raised but little above the ground ; with 
one hand the Knight supports the Shield, while with his other 
hand he generally either grasps his Sword or holds his crested 
Helm. 

Foreign Heralds regard with comparative indifference the 
number of the repetitions of any repeated Charge ; and they also 
are generally content to adjust the arrangement of their Charges, 
except in the case of the Ordinaries and other principal Charges, to 
the form of their Shield and the space at their disposal. In 
foreign Shields of Arms metal is occasionally found charged on 
metal, and colour upon colour : thus the Arms of the I^Mnish 
Inquisition are, sa., a cross vert. The French Hemlds indicate 
any such blazon by the term cousu or cousne : and such arms are 
distinguished as '* armes pour enguerir" such, that is, as will ex- 
cite inquiry into the causes which led to this deviation from the 
prevailing rule. In French Heraldry, the Saltier is often couped, 
and it sometimes has its ends floriated. The Cross is sometimes 
couped, and the other Ordinaries also. When one Charge rests 
upon any others, as in the instance of a Shield pcdy of six or and 
az. charged over all with a hend gu., or in any similar case, 
the French Heralds use the phrase hrochant sur le tout ; they also 

2 H 



406 FOREIGN HERALDRY. 

apply the tenn Brisure to any mark of Cadency, and a shield that 
is in any way differenced is said to be hrigS, 

Two lions (or other animals) rampant are placed face to &amp;ce 
by continental Heralds, when two Shields bearing snch Charges 
are impaled; as in No. 722, PL LIT., the Shield of Gueldr&amp;s. 
In this example the crowned lion faces to the Sinister because 
of the impalement; had he been borne alone, this lion would 
have faced to the Dexter, as a matter of course. This same 
usage is also extended to quartered Shields, in which lions (or 
other animals) rampant appear in the repeated quarters : thus, 
had the two coats that are impaled in No. 722, been quartered, 
the quarterly Shield would have borne the crowned lion fiusing 
to the Sinister in the 1st quarter and to the Dexter in the 4th, 
and the other lion would hiive faced to the Dexter and to the 
Sinister in the 2nd and 3rd quarters respectively. In like 
manner, the Arms of Queen Phiuppa of Hainault, No. 337, 
p. 159, in foreign blazon would have the 1st and the 3rd lions 
facing to the Sinister. The Arms of Wallenstein, Due de Fried- 
land, &lt;&amp;c.,a characteristic example of theusage under consideration, 
are thus blazoned : quarterly^ 1 aiu2 4, or^ a lion rampL crowned ax. ; 
2 and 8, as., a lion rampi. or. ; over aU^ on an eecuicheon of preUnte 
(or, sometimes, in an oval encircled hy a wreaih of laurel), the Arm 
of ihe Empire : the Crest is, out of a crest-coronet a vol az, and or: 
the Lambrequins are or and az. M. Bodton gives (page 300), 
with a woodcut, an example of two lions passant upon a chief, 
which are face to face : the Shield is that of '* Le Sieur de Day- 
PIERRK," who bears, ^' de gueules a troie pah de vair, au chef d'or a 
deux Lions affronUs de sable sur le chef^^ The same feeling, which 
thus expresses itself in the disposition of lions, &amp;c., is apparent 
in the desire genei*ally to have the quarters of a Shield corre- 
spond with one another, and also in a prevailing use of cotmter- 
changing in the tinctures of Foreign Heraldry ; and it extends, 
in the Heraldry of Germany, to what may be designated counter- 
charging — ^the blazoning the same Charge under reversed coudi- 



FOREIGN HERALDRY. 467 

tions, when it is repeated in Quartering : thus, the German Coat 
of DiK ScHROTENEQGER is, quarterltfy 1 and 4, or, an eagle disp. having 
two heads aa. ; 2 and 8, arg., a bend sinister embattled sa, ; this 
bend is counter-charged, — that is, the under side of this bend is 
embattled in one quarter, and the upper side in the other 
quarter. It is also a custom prevalent with the Heralds of Ger- 
many to devote the Shield itself to the quartered insignia of the 
lordships or territorial possessions of any noble House, while 
they charge upon an inescutcheon, in pretence over these insignia, 
the arms of the Family. 

The old practice of Dimidiatum^ which appears to have pre- 
vailed much more generally at an early period in the Heraldry 
of the Continent than it ever did in England, is still retained by 
modem Foreign Heralds; so that Dimidiated Shields, and par- 
ticularly such as bear an Eagle, are of common occurrence. In 
many instances, the effects of the dimidiating process are very 
singular and curious. I must be content to adduce a very few 
examples ; — 1. Die Brodsorg, oz., a fleur de lys arg,, dimidiated 
by a Shield arg. : this appears as a Shield per pale az, and arg., 
in the dexter half a fleur de lys of the last dimidiaied per pale. 2. 
Die Kustochen of Pomerania, the Shield per pale arg, and sa.^ 
charged with an Imperial Eagle and a fleur de lys counter-changed in 
their tinctureSy dimidiaied per pale and conjoined. 3. Morolin, per 
pale arg. and gu.y in the dexter half a dimidiated eagle of the second. 
4. Die Tappen, or, a dimidiated eagle to the sinister sa. 5. Vox 
Meggenheim, harry of six sa. and or, dimidiating or, an eagle disp. 
sa. 6. SiRADiA, a Province of Poland, or, an eagle disp. and a 
hear rampt., hoth dimidiated and conjoined in pale, sa., under the same 
Crown gold ; (See also Nos. 327, 328, PI. XVIII.) In the stained 
glass of the Church of Si £tienne du Mont, at Paris, are these two 
remarkable examples of Dimidiation ; — or, a tree eradicatedrhaving 
a serpent erUwined about its stem, aU ppr., dimidiating gu., two har^ 
hels embowed and addarsed, — ^the tree is dimidiated per pale down 
the stem, and one barbel only is seen : again (in a window of a 

2 H 2 



468 FOBEIQN HERALDRY. 

ohapel of the south aisle), 02., a lion rampi, or, a chief gu,, dimi- 
diating, or, three hedges in pale vert, oid of each as mcmy trees jfjpr. 
And, once more, in a miniature in the Imperial Library at Paris, 
the Lozenge of Arms of Louise d' Savoie, Dnchess d'AKGOUilME, 
Begent, and mother of Francis L, is dimidiated thus, the two 
Goats being misplaced, — to the Deaier, Savoy, the Cross being 
couped ; to the Sinister, France Modern : one half of the Gros, 
which is dimidiated per pale, is shown, with one fleur de Ijs in 
the sinister chief and one half of the fleur de lys in the base. 
Instances of dimidiated Arms occur on some of the Continental 
postage-stamps ; as in the stamp of Bergedorft, which bears an 
Imperial Eagle and a Castle, both dimidiated and conjoined in 
pale, with a Bugle-horn in base. 

Supporters generallj appear in Foreign Heraldry in pairs, both 
figures being alike : a single Supporter also frequently occurs. The 
Heralds of France distinguish between the figures of hmnan 
beings, when they act as Supporters, as also those of beings in 
human form, and the figures of animals of eveiy kind, the fonner 
being entitled " les tenants,^* and the latter '' les supports ;" and 
further, to trees and other objects from which Shields may be 
suspended, they have given the name of " les soutiens.'* 

The Mannings or Lambrequins of the Foreign Heralds, as a 
general rule, follow the tinctures (the principal metal and colonr) 
of the Arms ; and in the case of an impaled or quartered Coat&gt; 
the Lambreqnins would vary as the Arms : thus, for the Coat, 
org,, a cross sa,, impaling, gu., a f esse or, the dexter Lambreqnins 
would be sa,, doubled arg., and the sinister gu., doubled or, ; bnt if 
two Helms were placed above this Shield, the dexter Helm 
would have Lambreqnins of the first Coat, and the Sinister of the 
second. Lambrequins armoyees, or charged with the Arms of 
the Shield, are also in use. In the Heraldry of Fish (p. 72), the 
Achievement of Lorraine is engraved with the Lambreqnins 
thus armoyees. 

Collars of Knighthood encircle impaled Shields in Foreign 



FOREIGN HERALDRY. 469 

Heraldry; and, when there are two shields accoUea, a Collar 
may encircle them both, and a single Coronet may ensign them 
both. See p. 168. 

The Ldbdy which occurs in Foreign Shields, in several in- 
stances as a sole Charge, varies, in the number of its points, from 
a single point to six ; and it constantly appears in blazon as a 
Charge with other Charges. Thus, the Spanish family of 
Berenguer bears, quarterly^ 1 and 4 ,or, a label of one point az, : 
2 and 3, org., a tower gu., the port or : the family of Chignin, of 
Savoy, bears, gu,, a chevron arg,, charged with six ermine spots sa., in 
chief a label of as many points of the last. The Arms of Die 
Westphalen, of Saxony, are, arg,, a fesse gu., in chief a label of 
five points sa. ; and a similar label ensigns the Crest. The Arms 
of Die Brambach are, arg., a bend sin. gu., in chief a label of three 
points az. in bend : and those of Vox Mondet, of Burgundy, are, 
az., an ostrich-feather erect arg.^ in chief two labels of three points in 
pale or. And again, the Arms of Maussabr^, of Touraine, are 
oaf., a label in chief or : and those of Du Eozon, of Bretagne, gu.y a 
label org. 

FKANCE. France Ancient, — o«., sem^ de lys or: France 
Modern, — az., three fieurs de lys, two and one, or. 

In our own times the Arms of France have undergone a 
complete change ; so that the well-known heraldic term France 
Modem has become as completely historical as France Ancient, 
having, in its turn, been superseded by France Present. The 
Golden Eagle of the Emperor Napoleon, sitting calmly vigilant 
in an azure field, has succeeded to the Fieurs de Lys of gold that 
for so many centuries were identified with the Heraldry of 
France. The English Lions, accordingly, have survived their 
French rivals and associates, unchanged in their blazonry ; and, 
still as of old, representing the Boyal Dignity and the Eealm of 
England, they are passant guardunt in the front of the Heraldry 
of Europe. 



470 FOREION HERALDRY. 

The Shield of the French Empire is thus blasoned— iis., at 
eagle riting and rettpecHng to the nnistery gnuping in both hU datu a 
ihunder-hoU, aU or ; or, in thd words of M. Victor Bouton, "Les 
Napoleons portent: de L'Empire Frak^ais, qui est d'azar, &amp; 
I'aigle Ik la t6te contoum^ d'or, tenant un fondre de m^e.** I 
quote from ** Noweau TraUe de Blazon^'* by M. Bouton, published 
last year by the Brothers Garnier of Paris, — a work of singnlar 
interest and value, clear, explicit, oomprehensiTe, and profiisely 
illustrated, which may claim to be popular with the Heralds as 
well of England as of France. 

The National Flag of France, " the Tricolour," has iis coloms 
arranged vertically, the blue being next to the staff^ and the 
white in the centre. The Imperial Standard is eemSe of gcld^n 
heesy and it charges the Eagle of the Empire upon the central 
white division of the field. Before the Great Bevolution, the 
French Flag was white, and it was charged with the nationsl 
Achievement of Arms. Under the First Empire the Great Dig- 
nitaries received as a special augmentation of honour, to be borne 
by them all, a chief az,^ semSe of golden heee ; and, in like manner, 
the Dukes of the Empire all bear a chief of their dneal rank—ihaX 
is, a chief gu,y 9emee ofmuUete org. 

French Royal Cadency. — ^Unlike our own Princes of Wales, 
the Dauphin of France did not difference his arms with a Label; 
but he bore France in the 1st and 4th quarters of his Shield, 
quarterly with Dauphiny, or, a dolphin embowed ax. The circlet of 
his Coronet was heightened with fleurs de lys, and arched with 
four (or sometimes eight) dolphins. 

The Due d'Orleans: France, a Label of three points org. 

The Due d'Anjou : France, a Bordure gu. 

The Dug D'ALENyON: France, a Bordure gu.,chargedtoiih eight plaiei. 

The Due DE Berri : France, a Bordure eng, gu. 

The CoMTE d'Artois : France^ a Label of Caetile. 

The Due d' ANOouLiicE : France, a Labd org,, on each paint a 
crescent gu. 



FOREIGN HERALDRY. 471 

The Dukes of Burgundy : France, a Bordure compofUe arg. and 
gu. (Coll. Arm., MS. L. xiv.) 

The Crown of Henry IL, King of France, K.G., on his Garter- 
Plate at Windsor, has eight flenrs de lys upon the circlet, and 
another large fleur &lt;% lys rises from the intersection of its eight 
arches. 

AUSTRIA. Arms, — Or^ an Eagle mih two heads disp, aa., croumed 
armed and member ed gu,, having an Imperial Crown placed above it in 
the Shieldy holding in its deader date a Sceptre and a Sword, and in 
the sinister a Mound ; charged on the breast with a Shield, tiercSe in 
pale : 1. Hapsburgh, or, a lion rampt. gu. : 2. Austria, gu,, a f esse 
arg. : 3. Lorraine, or, on a hend gu,, three eaglets (or aUerions) 
arg. 

Supporters, — Two Griffins or, winged so. 

The Shield of Austria is surrounded with the Collars of the 
Austrian Orders of Knighthood, and ensigned with the Imperial 
Crown, No. 620, which is very singular in its form, being cleft 
somewhat after the manner of a mitre. The Arms of the Em- 
peror Francis of Austria, K.G., are blazoned at Windsor, on his 
Garter-Plate. 




No. 620.— Imperial Crown of Austria. 

The Imperial Eagle of Austria claims to be the successor to 
the eagle of the German Emperors, which, in its turn, succeeded 



472 FOREIGN HEBALDRY. 

to the eagle of Ancient Borne; and it still bears the two 
heads, which were significantly symbolical of the Eastern and 
Western Eoman Empires, bnt are not particularly happy in their 
symbolism when associated with the Austrian Kaiser. The 
Imperial shield, as I have shown, was coiunonly blazoned in 
England; a characteristic example I have placed at the head 
of this Chapter, No. 678 a, from the Plantagenet Monument at 
King's Langley. 

The field of the Imperial Standard of Austria is yellow, with 
an indented border of gold, silver, blue and black, and it dis- 
plays the Eagle of the Empire. The National Flag is formed of 
three equally wide horizontal divisions, the central one white, 
and the two others red; on the central division, towards the 
dexter, is a Shield charged as the Flag itself, having also the Im- 
perial Cypher within a narrow golden border, and ensigned with 
the Imperial Crown. The Flag of the Merchant Service omits 
the Shield and Crown. 

HUNGARY. Arms, — Oil, four bora org., impaling, gu.^ on a momiU 
vert, issuing from a ducal Coronet or, a patriarchal Cross arg. The 
Hungarian Crown, or St Stephen's Crown, is veiy peculiar in its 
form. Supporters, — Tnoo Angels holding tiie crown of St, Stephen 
over the shield. The National Colours are red, white and green, 
arranged horizontally, the green in chief, and the red in base. 

PRUSSIA. Arms, — Arg., an Eagle disp. sa., croumed, armed, mem- 
hered, and having on each wing a trefoU slipped, aU or, charged on the 
breast with the Soyal Cypher V croumed, and holding in the deiier 
claw a sceptre geld ensigned with a similar Eagle, and in the sinister 
daw a mound az. the circle and cross of the third. This shield is 
occasionally charged upon an Eagle of Prussia, after the manner 
of the Seal of Richard, Earl of Cornwall, No. 212 c, PI. LXII. 
Supporters, — Ttoo savage Men, wreathed, and holding dubs, aU ppr. 

The Prussian Crown, No. 621, has eight arches, and after the 
custom prevalent on the Continent it does not enclose any oap. 

The Prussian Eagle is displayed in the National Flag, the 



FOREIGN HERALDRY. 473 

naval Ensign having in the dexter chief angle a cross paUe m., 
voided of the field. The Boyal Standard has the field semSe of 
Prvssian Eagles. 




No. 621.— The Pruasian Crown. 

The Arms of the Princely House of Hohenzollern, are, quar- 
terly org, and sa. John Oeoroe, Prince of Hohenzollern, Knight 
of the Golden Fleece, in the reign of Phiup III., bore, quarterly^ 
1 and 4, Hohenzollern ; 2 and 4, Sigmaringen, on a mount verty 
a stag tripping or ; and, over all, as Hereditary Chamberlain of 
the Empire, gu., two Sceptres in saUire or, 

liUSSIA. llie Russian Arms differ from the Austrian in the 
Eagle holding only a Sceptre in its dexter claw, and being 
charged with a shield gu., bearing a figure of St. George 
mounted, and piercing the Dragon. This Shield is encircled 
with the Collar of the Russian Order of St. Andrew ; and the 
wings of the Eagle are also charged with two groups of small 
Shields representing the Provinces of the Empire. The Czar of 
'' all the Russias " considers himself entitled to bear the double- 
headed Eagle, as an imaginary successor to the Roman Caesars, 
(see Triers, Einleitung zu der WapenKunstj p. 312) ; the two heads 
of his Eagle, however, might denote European and Asiatic 
Russia — his Western and Eafctem Empires. The Garter-Plates 
of the Czars Alexander I., E.G., and Nicholas, E.G., are at 
Windsor. The Russian Flag has three horizontal divisions, tlie 
uppermost white, the central blue, and the lowermost red. The 



476 



FOREIGN HERALDRY. 



The Supporters of Denmark were originally two lions ; bnt at 
no distant period they have been superseded by two savage mei^ 
wreathed with leaves about tiieir heads and loinSj and hearing dobs^ 
aUppr. 

The Danish Ensign is red, charged with a white croBs, and 
the flag itself is swallow-tailed. In the Standard the cross is 
quadrate, and charged with the complete Boyal Achievement, 
the shield being encircled with the Collars of the Orders of the 
Elephant and the Danndn-og, (See *' The Family AJUanca of 
Denmark and Oreat BritoAn,'' by John Gough Nichols, F.S.A.; 
also, the same excellent Essay in the first volume of the '' Herald 
and Oenecdogia,** 

GREECE. Arms, — Az,, a cross couped org. Supporters, — Two 
figures of Hercules. Motto,— A fADH AAOY 12X12 MOY. The 
Flag is blue with a white cross, and this is cantoned on the 
Ensign, which is white with four blue bars. 

HANOVEB. Anns,— See page 299, and No. 541, PL XLVn. 
The Hanoverian Ensign resembles the red Ensign of England, 
but the Jack is chaiged with a white horse courani on the cross, 
which is quadrate. The national colours are yellow and white 
per fesse, the yellow in chief. 




No. 619.— Hesse-Darmstadt. 



HESSE-DAKMSTADT. Arms,- -42., a lion queue fourehee 
rampt, harry of ten org. and gu,^ crowned or, and holding in his dader 
paw a sword ppr., hilt and pommel gold ; No. 619. Supporters, — 



FOREION HERALDRT. 477 

Two liom queue fourchie croumed or. The Flag is, per fesse gu, and 
arg. 

HOLLAND. Arms, — Az,, hiUeUee, a lion rampt,, holding in 
his paw8 a naked etoord and a sheaf of arrows^ aU or. Supporters, — 
Two lions crowned or. The Flag is of red, white, and blue, ar- 
ranged horizontally, the red in chief and the white in the centre. 
The Standard has the Eoyal Achievement of Arms charged upon 
the white. 

ITALY. Arms, — Gu., a cross arg., within a hordure az. The 
Standard of green, white, and red, arranged vertically, has the 
Arms ensigned with the Crown on the central white division; 
the red is to the fly. 

The Arms of the House of Savot are, gu., a cross arg. ; but 
M. BouTON gives, for the Counts of Savoy, gu., a cross arg., within 
a hordure componSe or and aa. 

PORTUGAL. Arms,— -4r^., five escutcheons in cross az., each 
charged with as many plates in saltire ; the whole mthin a hordure 
gu., upon which seven castles or. Supporters, — Two dragons ppr., 
winged vert, each holding a Banner of the Arms. (See Garter-Plates 
at Windsor; also Shield at St Alban's and Seal at the end of 
this Chapter, No. 708.) The Standard is red, charged with the 
Arms and Crown; but the Ensign is per pale blue and white, 
similarly charged, the blue being next the staff. 

The Counts Palatine of the RHINE. Arms,— Sb., a liati 
rampt. or, croumed gu. 

SAXONY. Arms,— See p. 168, and No. 353, p. 314. In the MS. 
Collection of Arms presented to the College of Arms by Sir 
William Dugdale (MS. LXIV.), the Shield of Saxony is blazoned, 
harry of six or and sa. M. BouTOx gives the blazon of Saxony 
thus : — " Les dues de Saxe, portent : fascS d'or et de sable de huit 
pieces, du crancetin de sinople mis en hende sur le tout.** The Arms 
are quartered in the second quarter (Thuringia is in the first 
quarter) by John George, second Duke of Saxony, K.G. (a.d. 
1668,) upon his Garter-Plate. In the German-Gothic Court at 



478 FOREION HERALDRY. 

the Crjstal Palace there are some good casts of early Shields of 
the Arms of Saxont. The Supporters of SAXE-CoBURa-QoTHA are 
two lions reguardaiU ppr.j crowned or, 

SPAIN. Anxis, — ^the same as are blazoned for Catherine of 
Arragon, with France Modem (or Anjou) in pretence. See p. 308. 
Supporters, — Tioo lions or^ ectd^ holding a Banner quwrierly cf 
Castile and Leon, mih, over aU, Anjou. But these are seldom used, 
the rule being that no Supporters should be employed when a 
shield is ensigned with the collar of the Order of the Golden 
Fleece. The Standard bears the Arms displayed over its whole 
area. The Ensign is yellow, interposed between two horizontal 
bars (each of them half its own depth) of red, and it is charged 
towards the dexter with Castile and Leon impaled within a red 
circular bordure, and ensigned with the Spanish Grown. Tot 
the blazon of the Arms of Castile and Leon, see page 306 ; see 
also No. 136, PI. I. ; and "Castile and Leon" in Chap. XXXJU. 

SWEDEN and NORWAY. Anns : Swedex Ancient,— ^l*., U&amp;ee 
hends sinister wavy arg,, over aU a lion rampt, or, crowned gu, : Swe- 
de.^ Modern, — Az,, three open crowns, two and one, or : Norway, — 
Ou., a lion rampt. or, crowned gold, holding in his paws a IkmM 
haUle axe ppr., (he blade in chief. The present King, as the heir 
and successor of an elected King, charges in pretence upon the 
National Shield the Arms of Yasa, — Tierce in bend az. org, and gu.y 
over aU a vase or. : impaling his own paternal arms of Bernadotte, 
— Az., over a river in base proper, a bridge, thereon two towers arg^, 
in chief an eagle crowned, and accosted by seven estoHes or. A Shield 
of Norway appears upon the ceiling of the nave at St. Alban's : 
and the Shield of Arms of Christian XI., King of Sweden, K.G. 
(a.d. 1668), is blazoned upon his Qarter-Plate at Windsor. 
Supporters, — Two lions rampt, reguardani crowned or. The 
Flag of Sweden is blue, with a yellow cross; and that of 
Norway is red with a blue cross having a white fimbriation. 
These two Flags are combined to form a United Ensign, after 
the manner of our Union Jack; and the United Flag is can- 



FOREIGN HERALDRY. 479 

toned in tbe National Ensjgns, the Standard being also chai^d 
with the Royal Arms, Crown, and Supporters. 

SWITZERLAND. AxmB,—Qu„ a Cross humeUie org. Each of 
the Cantons has also its own armorial insignia. 

TURKEY. Arms and Flag, — Ou,, a Moon decrescent or, and an 
Estoile arg., infesse. 

WURTE^fBURG. Arms,— Or, three Stag's attires in pale sa., 
impaling, for Hohenstaufer, or, three Lions pass, in pale sa., the right 
paw gu. Supporters, — A Lion as in the arms, crowned or ; and a 
Stag ppr. The Flag is crimson and black divided per fesse, the 
crimson in chief. 

The range of this Treatise does not admit of my extending the 
present Chapter so fSeir, as to comprehend the armorial insignia 
and the flags of the Free Cities and of all the minor States of 
Germany, with those of the several States of both North and 
South America; nor can I here even advert to the barbaric 
Heraldry of the East. 

The few Foreign Titles of Nobility that are held, either by 
grant or inheritance, by British Subjects, do not convey any 
privilege or precedence in this country. However real in them- 
selves, and whatever the degree of rank they might confer in 
the dominions of the Sovereigns from whom they have been 
derived, they are purely honorary distinctions here, and they 
can be recognized in England only through a special Royal 
Licence from our own Sovereign to that efiect. The Arms of 
these Personages, as would be expected, have certain Augmenta- 
tions granted by Foreign Heralds, or their entire blazonry par- 
takes more of Foreign than of English hei'aldic feeling and usage. 
These Arms are appended to our Peerages ; so that it will be 
sufficient for me to remark that the Coronets, with which these 
Shields of Arms are ensigned, differ from the Coronets of our 
own Peers in having no caps, nor is their rank determined 



480 



FOREIGN HERALDRY. 



in acoordanoe with English rale. The Coronet of a Dyke of 
France is ensigned with parsley lemes—'^ fetdUea d'ache ;** that of 
a MarqtMy with three parsley leaves alternating with as many de- 
voted pearls; and that of a Count, with nine pearls^ while a 
Baron has a *' bonnet gresU de perles*^ The German Dukes arch 
their Coronets, and the Counts sometimes slightly elevate their 
numerous pearls. 

Foreign Nohility, while resident in England, as a matter of 
course, enjoy every privilege of their rank, and eaob individual 
bears his own heraldic insignia here as he would in his native 
country. 




Ko. 708.— Seal of Beatrice of Portlgal, Counteaa of Abundkl and 
SxjRREY, temp. Henry V : Fiizalim and Warretme quarterly, impaling 
Portugal^ Sco p. 477. 




Neville Anoixmt. 
No. 725.— See page 461. 



CHAPTER XXXni. 



SUPPLEMENTARY. 



I. Heraldic Authorities and Treatises on Heraldry. 

Copies only of the earliest Bolls of Arms are known now to 
be in existence. These Kolls contain the armorial bearings 
with the titles of the Sovereign and his Family, and also those 
of the Princes and principal Nobles, Bannerets and Knights 
of his time. 

1. Boll of Henry III. Date, between a.d., 1240—1246. 
The original lost. A copy by Glover, Somerset Herald, with 
the Arms blazoned but not drawn, dated 1586, and presented 
by him to the College of Arms, where it is preserved, bound 
up with other heraldic MSS. in a volume entitled Miacdkmea 
Curiosa, L. 14 : this volume was presented to the College by 
Sir William Dugdale, Garter, in 1676. The Boll edited, with 
highly interesting and valuable remarks and an Ordinary of the 
Arms, by Sir Harris Nicholas, in 1829. 

2. Second Boll of Henry III. Probable date, about 1270. 

2 I 



482 SUPPLEMENTARY. 

The original lost. A copy, with arms (about seven hnndrod 
in number) trioked by Charles, Lancaster Herald, in 1607, 
in the British Museum, Harl. MBS., 6589 : about to be published 
in the Archoeologia, 

3. Roll of Caerlavebock. Date, 1300. Contemporary copies 
in the British Museum, CoUon MSS., Caligula, A. XVIII; and in 
the College of Arms, JCS., No, 27. Copies by Glover in tiie 
College of Arms, and in Ulster's Office, Dublin. Translated and 
published with the original text, with copious and most valuable 
notes, and with wood-cuts of the banners and shields of arms, by 
Sir Harris Nicholas, in 1828 : also, '* edited from the MS. in 
the Biitish Museum, with a translation and notes, by Thoios 
Wrioht, Esq., with the coat-armours emblassoned in gold and 
colours," in 1864. 

4. Falkirk Roll of Edward I., a.d. 1298. Copy in the British 
Museum, Barl. MSS.^ 6589. 

6. Roll of Edward II. Date between 1308 and 1314. Original 
in the British Museum, Cotton MSB., Caligula, A. XVIII, Pub- 
lished by Sir Harris Nicholas, with a very valuable Ordinaiy 
of the Roll by Joskph Gwilt, Esq., in 1828. 

6. Dunstable Roll of Edward II., a.d. 1309. Copy in the 
British Museum, HarL MSB, 1309. 

7. Boroughbridge Roll of Edward II., a.d. 1322. Original at 
Oxford. Ashmolean MBS., No. 731. 

8. Roll of Edward HI. Date, between 1337 and 1350. Copy 
in the College of Arms, written in 1562, with some of the coats 
tricked, by Cotgravk, Richmond Herald. Edited by Sir Harris 
Nicholas, in 1828. 

9. Calais Roll of Edward 111,, a.d. 1347. Copy, a.d. 1607, in 
the College of Arms. Edited by Mr. Mores. 

10. Roll of Richard II. Date, 1392—1397. Original in 
private possession. Edited, with a Preface, by Mr. Willkmest, 
in 1834. 

In addition to these, several other early Rolls of Arms are in 



SUPPIiEMENTARY. 483 

existence, and some of them are in the poss^Bsion of private 
individuals. It is to be hoped that these valuable records will 
be published. 

In these Roll§, the heraldic formula, to " bear arms," occurs : 
they also contain the titles of the tinctures, and various heraldic 
terms and expressions now in use. ITius, in a Roll of the time of 
Edward III., probably a.d. 1337, there are the following entries :— 
" Brian FUzAlan de Bedale porte, harre de goules et d'ar de 
viij peces :** 

" Bauf de Oamays parte, d^ar ope chief de goules el troi$ tur- 
teaux d^argeni en le chief: 

** Fiers de Boidhe port, d^argeni ove vn chevron de sable d (rois 
testes de lou de gouUs racer" 

The various MS8. Collections preserved at the College of Arms, 
with other similar collections in the British Museum, the 
Bodleian Library at Oxford, and elsewhere, are Heraldic Autho- 
rities of the highest order. Heraldic Authorities of equal rank, 
and possessing the strongest claims upon the attention of all 
students of Hei^dry, are the monumental and architectural col- 
lections in Westminster Abbey, St. George's Chapel, and in the 
cathedrals, churches, and collegiate chapels throughout the realm. 
The earliest writer on Heraldry, whose works are of any 
real value to the student, is William Camden, Clarencieuz, bom 
in 1551, and died in 1623. 

In 1822 was published Moule's BtbKoAeca ffenddica^ being 
a catalogue of all the works on Heraldry and heraldic subjects 
that had at that time appeared in this country. 

PMished works on Heraldry: 

1. Vincent on Brooke's Catalogue of NcbQiiy^ 1622. 

2. Dtjgdale's Baronage, 1675. 

3. Sandford's Oenealogieal Bidory of England, 1707. 

4. Nrsbit's SyOem of Heraldry, 1722. 

5. GvuAJU*^ Display of Heraldry, 1724. 

2 I 2 



484 SUFPLiareNTART. 

G. Anstis* Beglder of the Garter, 1724. 

7. Wdoire CUnSalogique et Okronciogique de la-Maisan Reyale de 
France^ 1726. 

8. Aftnarial OhUnd de France, 1768. 

9. Asbmolb'b Order of ike Oarter, 1772. 

10. Edmondson's Complete Body of Heraldry^ 1780. 
And more recently published, 

11. Bev. Mark Noble's Htatory of the College rf Arms. 

12. Bank's Dormant and Extinct Peerages. 

13. Sir Harris Nicholas* Synopne of ^ Peerage. 

14. The Historic Peerage of England, by Sir Harbis Kichoi.a8, 
edited by Wm. Courthope, Esq., Somerset Herald. 

16. Vicomte De Magny's NobUimire Univered. 

16. Planch^'s Purmivant at Arms, ' 

17. Montagu's Otdde to the l^tidy of Heraldry. 

18. "MovL^'s Heraldry of Fish, 

19. Lower's Curiosities of Heraldry. 

20. Willement's Begal Heraldry. 

21. Willement's Heraldic Notices of Canterbury Cathedral. 

22. Shirlet's Nolfle and OcfUle Men of England. 

28. Seton's Law and PracUce of Heraldry in ScoUand. 

24. Bouton's Noveau Traitide Blason. 

25. Papworth's Ordinary of Arms, (in the couTse of publica- 
tion in Parts, by subscription). 

26. Parker's IHctumary of Heraldry. 

27. Thom's Booh of the Court. 

28. Laing's Catalogue of Ancient Scottish Seals. 

29. Burke's Peerage. 

30. Burke's Dormant and Extinct Peerages and Baronetdes; 
Commoners, and Landed Gentry. 

31. Burke's Armory. 

32. The Herald and Oenealogia, (serial), edited by John Gouqh 
Nichols, F.S.A. 

These works form a selectei^ series, and with them may be 



SUPFUSMKNTARY. 4f85 

associated the ArchodoLogia ; the Journals of the ArehcBoiogical 
InsiUute and AssQciaiion, particularly the papers on Heraldic 
subjects in the latter publication by Mr. Planch^, and those 
on Seals in the former ; Stothabd's Ejfigiea ; Waller's Brasses ; 
the OendemaaCs Magazine^ and the County Histories, and the 
Wills of Boyal and other important personages; and also that 
most useful of periodicals, Noies and Queries. 

I must add, that the well-known introductory little volume, 
'* Clarke's Heraldry" is about to reappear, edited by Mr. Planch^ : 
and, that a well executed *' Pra^^ical Manual,'' specially designed 
for the use of heraldic Illuminators, has been very recently pub- 
lished ; it is the conjoint production of Mr. B. F. J. Baiobnt, and 

Mr. C. J. RUi!SELL. 

II. Miscellaneous Addenda. 

1. TiNCTURKS, p. 19. The dots and lines by which the Tinc- 
tures of Heraldry are now commonly indicated, are attributed to 
an Italian, Silvestre de Petrasancta, who describes them in his 
^* De SynAolis Heroicis,'' lib. vij., p. 313, Antveipiae, 1634. This 
Symbolization, however, did not come into general use until the 
18th century. Some such Symbolization may occasionally be 
observed in the engraved shields of Brasses, in anticipation of 
Petrasancta. The colour Purpure appears only on rare occasions 
in early English blazon. In the Caerlaverogk Boll, the very 
first Banner, that of Henry de Lact, Earl of Lincoln, bears 
a lion rampant purpure on a golden field : — 

'* Baner ont de un cendal mMa, 
O nn lioan rampant porprin." 

In the HoU of Edw. II., the arms of Sir Felip de Lyneshkye 
are, or, an eagle displayed purpure ; and those of Sir Johan de 
Dene, org., a lion rampi, purpure. In the Roll of Edw. III., 
♦* Mal£MAYN&gt;:s port d'argent, a une bend engrele de purpure " — 
a bend engrailed purpure. In these same Bolls Sir Henry le 



486 SUFPLEIIENTABT. 

ScBOPE and Sir Wm. le Scrope both bear their golden bend 
charged with a {ton rampl. purpure. 

2. The Shield of Earl William de Valence: pages 38 and 186. 
The oarefol and excellent jbo-fiimile drawing of this beantiM 
example of heraldic ehamplenS enamel, executed by Mr. Ber- 
rington, one of the veigers of Westminster Abbey, the fall dze 
of the original shield 20^ inches in height, has just been pub- 
lished in chromo-lithography : and the large engraving has been 
produced by Mr. Durlaoher, by whom all my own lithogr^bB, 
including the reduced representation of this same shield (Plate 
yn.), have been engraved. I am glad to be enabled thus to 
invite attention to Mr. Bebbington'b very fine and valuable work. 

3. The arms of Navarre : pages 41 and 306. The true blazon 
of these arms is, gulcB^ a cross, saUire and doMe orle of chaku, aH 
linked togdher^ or. The chains are sometimes represented as 
formed of fiat solid pieces, (No. 134 a, PI. YIU.,) and sometimes 
of open links of rings {Favyne^ ii., 1874) : in the arms of Naaxm 
blazoned upon the monument of Henry IY. at Canterbury, the 
chains are of fiat solid pieces. This singular device is said to 
have been assumed by Sancho ** the Strong," in memory of his 
successful attack upon a Moorish prince, whose army was in 
part defended by a barricade of chains : and, say the Spanish 
Historians, " because in this battle he burst in the palisade of 
chains, the King of Navarre took for his arms the chains of gold 
trellised — ahravasata — in a blood-red field." 

4. The Fylfot: p. 44. See Notes and Queries, 3rd series, 
v., 468, 624; and vi., 51, 96, 135. This figure appears upon 
the shield-belt of Sir John D'Aubernoun, a.d. 1277 ; and in the 
Brass to Bobert Arthur, at Ghartham, a.d. 1454. 

5. The Mullet: pp. 47 and 52. The Mullet not pierced 
certainly appears as a charge before the introduction of spurs 
having rouelles, as in the noble shield of Bobert de Verb at 
Hatfield Broadoak; so that the statement in p. 47 requires, at 
any rate, to be modified. 



SUPPLEMENTABY. 487 

6. Aims of the Isle of Man : p. 56. In examples blazoned at 
different periods, the armour of the three conjoined limbs is 
represented in accordance with the prevalent fashion of the 
defensive equipment: thus in No. 176a, PL XIV., the armour 
is banded mail ; but in the transcript of the EoU of BiCH. II., 
written and having the arms blazoned about 1515, the armour 
is plate. The Arms of the Island of Sicily resemble those of the 
Isle of Man, but the limbs are not in armour, and at their point 
of junction there is a human fiEu;e : these arms appeared on the 
postage-stamps of Sicily, before that island became a part of the 
kingdom of Italy. The device itself, probably having reference 
to the name of the island, Trinacria, is displayed on the ancient 
coins of Sicily. 

7. Blazon of the Lion : p. 67. The early blazon of the Lion 
rampant and the Lion passant guardant is still retained by the 
modem Heralds of France. See Bouton's Nouveau TVaitS de 
Blasan, p. 305, '* Du Lion et du Lhpard:' 

8. The Lions of England : p. 58. The English Lion passant 
guardant has his head to the dexter. Occasionally upon heraldic 
inlaid paving-tiles, the three Lions of England face to the 
sinister : this is simply the error of the tile-producer, who had 
neglected to reverse the shield on his engraved stamp. Examples 
occur at King's Langley in Hertfordshire, Horsted Keynes in 
Sussex, and elsewhere; the King's Langley tiles include the 
shield of Henbt the third Earl, and Henkt the first Duke of 
Lancaster — England differenced wiA a lendlet. 

9. Descriptive Terms : p. 77. The heraldic terms and forms of 
expression that occur in the early Bolls of Arms will be found 
to abound in valuable information to the student of Heraldry. 

10. Knights Bannerets and the Gaerlaverock Boll : pp. 93, 
and 287. I gladly refer students to a most interesting notice of 
Mr. Wright's new edition of the Gaerlaverock Boll, in the 
Herald and Genealogist, vol. ii., p. 377 ; (the Part published in 
September, 1864). Amongst other corrections in the new Trans- 



488 SUPPLEMENTAKY. 

lation, the exprefision in the original, '* homerez^^ is rendered by 
the new editor '* Bannerets" instead of " Banners" and thus the 
tme heraldic import of the Poem, as a Boll of the Bannerets 
only (and not of the whole even of them), is established. Be- 
sides King Edward himself, the Boll gives the arms of eighty^six 
Bannerets; the shields of arms also of seventeen Rni^ts are 
added. 

11. Co&amp;ONBre : pp. 94, 101, 104, and 133. The circlets of the 
Coronets of the Peers are incorrectly described as '* jewelled :'* 
Mr. GouRTHOPE has kindly corrected this error, and enabled me 
to record that *' no coronets are jewelled, there being a special 
order against any snch decoration." J have not been ahle to 
correct my engraved examples, Nos. 254, 276, 281, 302, 317, 
281 A, and 302 a. It is remarkable that all early examples of 
Ck&gt;ronet8 have the circlet enriched T^ith jewels; and modem 
Coronets are almost invariably represented in the same 
manner. 

12. BoBES of the Peers: pp. 94, 103, 104, 117, and 133. The 
** Mantles " of the Peers described in the text, are the ParUo' 
mentary Bcbes of those noble Lords : the Peers have also crimson 
velvet Bobes of Estate, not Parliamentary. 

13. '* Compartment :*' p. 97. In this page, after the pan^ 
graph on ^* Coins" there should have followed a notice of an 
heraldic " Compartment" a term peculiar to Scottish Heraldry, 
which denotes a '* kind of carved panel, of no fixed form, placed 
below the escutcheon, bearing the supporters, and usnally in- 
scribed with a mptto or the name and designation of the owner.** 
— Seton, p. 276. 

14. The Elde^ Sons of DuK£a3 : p. 103. Whatever the tUU 
borne by the eldest son of any Duke, his rank is always the 
same. 

15. Page 103. A Ddke is *' Most Noble," and not «' Most 
Honourable -" a Duchess also is " Most Ncble" 

16. Esquires: p. 106. Thei-e are no Esquires of the Order of 



SUPPLEMENTARY. 489 

the Garter, nor has the Order ever ansociated any Esquires with 
the Knights. 

17. The Earl Marshal: pp. 112, 132 and 168. llie title 
Earl Marshal is strictly heraldic, and altogether distinct 
from the title of that high o£Bcer as a Peer of the Eealm: 
thus, as stated in the text, the Duke of Norfolk is the Earl 
Marshal. 

18. Ordinary of Arms: p. 121. I desire to direct the atten- 
tion of Students of Heraldry to an heraldic publication which 
possesses peculiar claims on them: this is Mr. Fapworth's 
** Ordincury ofArms,*^ a work which is not known as it ought to 
be, and the value and utility of which it would be difficult to 
estimate too highly. 

19. Marshalling: p. 135. In the seventeenth centuiy the 
marshalling of quartered shields of arms was frequently con- 
ducted on principles that are most difficult to understand : and 
subsequently there are strong reasons for supposing that many 
shields rich in elaborate quarterings, which ought to be copious 
chapters of heraldic History, are in reality worse than worthless 
through the uncertainty or the absolute want of true heraldic 
accuracy in their marshalling. At what period true heraldic 
accuracy ceased to be understood, even by many of those very 
persons who would never hesitate to blazon and carve and 
display shields distinguished only by their ftlse marshalling, 
I am not able to determine : I do know, however, that at the 
present time true marshalling, even in its simplest expressions, 
is altogether disregarded by persons who, while ignoring the 
College of Arms, take it for granted that ignorance of Heraldry 
does not disqualify themuselves from marshalling shields of arms. 
While these sheets were passing through the press, 1 myself 
saved a Minister of the Crown from quartering ike arma of hie own 
wife upon a sculptured shield, in his own mansion : it is un- 
necessary for me to suggest what kind of an heraldic chronicle 
would have been recorded by the designer of this shield, had he 



490 SUPPLEMENTARY. 

been required to maiBhal on it ten or twelve or more distinct 
yet allied coats of arms. 

20. Arms of Queen Phiuppa of Haikaolt: p. 159. In the 
wood-cut of this shield of arms, the second and fourth quarters 
ought to have heen divided quarterly. 

21. Arms of the Beauchamps : p. 179. The * Eons Boll," pre- 
served in the College of Arms, contains a series of very curious 
differenced shields of the Beauchamps. 

22. CRE8T-CoROi&lt;rET : p. 266. I observe that this term has been 
introduced into their " Practical Manual of Heraldry" by Mr. 
Baiqent and Mr. Bussell, from my own Volume, but without any 
reference or acknowledgment. 

23. Supporters: pp. 130, 275, 378. The principal Hammer* 
beams of the grand trussed roof of Westminster Hall, as is well 
known, are carved to represent figures of Angels. Each of these 
figures carries — supports — a large shield of the Boyal Arms of 
EiCHARD II. ; and a veiy recent visit to Westminster Hall oon- 
vinces me, that I have not duly estimated the influence exercised 
by these Angel&gt;figures with their supported shields in leading to 
the adoption of regular heraldic *' Supporters." 

24. Arms of Leon : p. 306 ; also pp. 42, 157, and 388. I have 
blazoned the Lion of Leon gules, hecause the balance of authority 
so decidedly inclines to gules in preference to purpure. The 
Spaniards themselves also blazon this shield, — *^ En Escudo piaia^ 
leon rqjOy'' or, . . . ** un lean rampante rofo,*^ — a lion gules, " The 
uncertainty as to the proper tincture of the lion in the Arms of 
Leon has doubtless arisen from the vagueness attending the use 
of the word purpureus or mohchinus in the Latin blazon of those 
arms :" See an able paper by the Bev. John Woodward in Note* 
and Queries, third Series, i., 471. It is singular that in the 
quartered shield of Castile and Leon, on the monument of 
Edward III. at Westminster, the lion of Leon is unquestionably 
tinctured purpure. 

25. The Order of St. Patrick ; p. 346. With the restoration 



SUPPLEMSNTABT. 491 

of St Patrick's Cathedral in Dublin, a work so happily accom- 
plished through the princely munificence of Mr. Guinness, is to 
be associated a restoration of the Lady Chapel of that Cathedral, 
with the special view of adapting it to the occupation and use of 
the Knights of the Order of St. Patrick. This most interesting 
work is under the direction of the Cathedral architect, Mr. Slater, 
who proposes to carry out his plan in the most complete and 
consistent manner. 

26. Early Scottish Seals : p. 414. All Students of Heraldry 
will be gratified by learning that a Second Series of illustrated 
descriptions of Early ScoUish Seah is in the course of preparation 
by Mr. Hesrt Lainq. The historical and heraldic value of 
Mr. Lainq's First Series of Scottish Seals, and the beauty and 
fidelity of the engraved examples give the best possible assurance 
of the high character which will distinguish a second volume 
by the same learned and accomplished gentleman. The work 
will be published, by subscription, by Edmonston and Douglas, 
of 88, Princes Street, Edinburgh. 

27. Fictitious Heraldry : p. 443. •* The Herald and Genea- 
logist,'' (vol. ii. pp. 262 and 471,) is doing good service in 
exposing the proceedings of ** Vendors of Fictitious Heraldry." 
Let it not be forgotten that the purchasers are far more deserving 
of reprehension than the vendors of this '* imitative jewelry :" 
would it not be possible to distinguish their purchases by sub- 
jecting them to at least a fourfold tax? 

28. Page 456. To the Examples of satisfactory heraldic en- 
gravings specified in this page, I desire here to add those con- 
tained in Mr. Laino's *' Descriptive Catalogs of Ancient Scottish 
Seals" with the small Shields of Arms that so freely illustrate 
the pages of Mr. Shirley's " Noble and Oentle Men of England.*" 

29. I have not yet been able to discover for whom the follow- 
ing shield of arms may have been designed,— France Modem and 
England quarterly, toithin a hordure of France — the same bordure 
that was borne by Prince John of Eltham with England only : this 



492 SUPPLEMENTARY. 

shield oooura amongst a series of shields blazoned in oolour in 
the MS. collection, to which I have several times referred, 
{CoUeci. Ourioda L, xiv.,) and which is preserved in the College of 

Ai*ra8. 




No. 582 A.— Monogram and Collar of S8 of John Babet, Bury St. BdinuiHl &amp; 
See page 337. 



LIST OF PLATES. 



Plate nige 



I. Shields and Achieyement of ArmA 

n. Ordinaries — Roundles 

m. Heialdry of the Cross 

lY. Snbordinaries — Varied Fields 

V. Shields of Arms 

VI. Shields of Arms 



Vn. Enamelled Shield of Earl William de Valenoe Frontispiece 



YIII. Charges— Inanimate Objects 

IX. Charges—Inanimate Objects 

X. Heraldry of the Lion 

XI. Charges— Animate Beings 

Xn. Charges— Animate Beings and Natural Objects 

Xm. Charges— Natnral Objects, dto. 

XIV. Shields of Arms .... 

XV. Charges— Inanimate Objects, dsc 

XVI. Ducal Coronets, Basinets, and Crest-Wreaths 

XVII. EfQgy of Lady Tiptoft, and Shields of Aims 

XVEIL Marshalling— Dimidiation 

XIX. Marshalling ..... 

XX. Marshalling and Cadency— Arms of De Bohtms 

XXL Effigy of EarlJohnde Hastings 

XXn. Marshalhng and Cadency- Impalements 

XXm. Manhalling— Impalements and Qoarterings 

XXIV. Marshalling ..... 

XXV. Cadency— CroBslets, MkrtletB, &amp;o. . 



16 
22 
26 
31 
32 
38 



39 

62 

67 

63 

67 

73 

107 

96 

102 

114 

146 

168 

151 

161 

163 

165 

140 

179 



L94 


LIST OF PLATES. 




Pr.ATR 




1^ 


XXVI. 


GrestB 


. 266 


XXVII. 


Cadency— CroBBletB, Escallops, Gmquefoils, &amp;&lt; 


8. . 176 


xxvm. 


Cadency— Mullets, Flenre-de-lys, &amp;c. 


. 184 


XXIX. 


Pennons, Standards, &amp;c. 


. 288 


XXX. 


Crests and Knots . . . . 


. 284 


XXXI. 


Cadency— Labels of the Plantagenets 


. 238 


xxxn. 


Cadency— Bordnies 


. 248 


xxxm. 


Cadency— Labels . . . . 


. 2445 


XXXIV. 


Cadency— Plantagenet Shields and Labels . 


. 236 


XXXV. 


Banners, Standard, Helm, and Sail 


. 290 


XXXVL 


Boyal Cadency, and British Ensigns . 


. 252 


xxxvn. 


Cadency— Crossleis, Mnllets, do. 


. 183 


xxxvm. 


Cadency— Arms of the De Valences, &amp;o. 


. 188 


XXXIX. 


Cadency and Badges— Fleurs-de-lys . 


. 190 


XL. 


Cadency— Annulets, Eoundles, Cantons, Ac. 


. 196 


XI.I. 


Coronets, and Crests 


. 331 


XLIL 


Crowns . . . . . 


. 318 


XTilll. 


Lancastrian Collars, and Insignia of the Gari 


BT . 336 


XLIV. 


Yorkist Collars, and Insignia of the Garter 


. 339 


XLV. 


Cadency, and Helms 


. 403 


XLVI. 


Shields of Arms, Crest, and Victoria Cross 


. 365 


XTiVn. 


Shields of Arms, and Boyal Badges . 


. 360 


XLVI IT. 


Cadency— Crosslets, Billets, MarUets, &amp;c. 


. 198 


XLIX. 


Cadency .... 


. 211 


L. 


Cadency— Eoundles, &amp;c. 


. 195 


LI. 


Cadency— Bordures, and Mantlings 


. 214 


LH. 


Lozenge and Shields of Arms 


. 327 


LHI. 


Quartered Arms of the Prince of Wales 


. 324 


LIV. 


Insignia of the Garter 


. 341 


LV. 


Insignia of the Thistle 


. 345 


LVL 


Insignia of St. Patrick 


. 346 


LVIL 


Insignia of the Bath 


. 348 


LVllL 


Boyal Arms of England 


. 300 


LIX. 


Boyal Aims of England 


. 301 


LX. 


Arms of the Prince of Wales . 


. 325 


LXI. 


Insignia of Star of India 


. 352 



LIST OF PLATES. 



495 



Platb 








Pkge 


Lxn. 


Cadency— Bordupes 


. 216 


Lxni. 


Effigyof Henry, Duke of Lancaster . 


. 235 


LXIV. 


Coronets, Crests, and Mantlings 


. 270 


LXV. 


Arms of the Confessor, aad the Hollands 


. 247 


LXVI. 


Garter-Plate— Humphrey de Bohnn, K.G. 


. 116 


LXVIL 


Shields of Arms . . . . 


. 175 


Lxvni. 


Shields of Arms 






. 192 


LXIX 


Shields of Anns 






. 461 


LXX. 


Seals . 






. 409 


Lxxr. 


Shields of Arypti 






. 209 


T.xxn. 


Shields of Arms 






. 202 


Lxxm. 


Shields of Arms 






. 212 


LXXIV. 


Shields of Anns 






. 222 


LXXV. 


Arms of Denmark 






. 326 


TiXXVI. 


Badges, &amp;c. . 






. 267 


Lxxvn. 


Arms of Abhot Ramryge, St Alban's 


. 451 


LXXVIII. 


Shields of Arms, Si Alban's 


. 453 


LXXIX. 


Slab of Henhy IV., from Venice 


. 258 


LXXX 


Marshalling and Cadency 


. 149 


LXXXI. 


Seals 


. 407 


LXXXIL 


Seals . 






. 412 



LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS. 



No. 
I A. 



3 

6 a: 

7 

8 

9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
18 
19 
20 
21 
22 
23 
24 
25 
26 
27 
28 
29 
SO 
81 
32 
38 

33 a. 
33 b. 
31 
35 
36 
37 
88 
39 
40 
40 a. 



ijeroaalem, p. 8. 
Jerusalem, p. 8. 
ranoe Ancient, p. 12. 

I Heraldic Shidda, p. 13. 

Heraldic ShieldB, p. 15. 

Provence, plate L 

Points of the Shield, p. 17. 

Per Pale, p. 17. 

Per Fesse, p. 17. 

Per Oroes, or Quarterly, p. 17. 

Per Bend, p. 17. 

Per Saltire, p. 17. 

Per Chevron, p. 17. 

Quarterly of eight, p. 17. 

Quarterly Quartered, p. 17. 

Dividing and Border Lines, p. 18. 

Or, p. 19. 

Argent, p. 19. 

Azure, p. 19. 

Gules, p. 19. 

Sable, p. 19. 

Vert, p. 19. 

Purpura, p. 19. 

Ermine, p. 20. 

Ermines, p. 20. 

Erminois, p. 20. 

Vair, p. 20. 

Vair. p. 20. 

Counter Van-, p. 20. 

Potent, p. 20. 

Counter Potent, p. 20. 

A Chief, plate ii. 

De NevMe, p. 25. 

De Lacy, p. 25. 

A Fesse, pkte ii. 

A Bar, plate ii. 

A Pale, plate iL 

A Cross, plate ii. 

A Bend, plate ii. 

A Saltire, plate ii. 

A Chevron, plate ii. 

De Clare, p. 21. 



No. 

41 A Pile, plate iL 

42 Two Bars, plute ii. 

43 A Feflse O^ised, plate ii. 

44 Bars Gemelles, plate ii. 

45 A Pale endoned, plate ii. 

46 On a Bend, plate li. 

47 A Bend Cotised, plate ii. 

48 A Bibbon, plate ii. 

49 On a Saltire, plate ii. 
49 A. In Chief; plate ii. 

49 B. In Fesse, plate ii. 
49 c. In Pale, plate ii. 
49 D. In Cross, plate ii. 
49 B. In Bend, plate ii. 
49 F. Id Saltire, plate ii. 
49 Q. In Chevron, plate ii. 

49 H. In Pale, plate ii. 

50 A Bezant, plate ii. 

51 A Plate, plate ii. 

52 A Hnrte, plate ii. 

53 A Torteau, plate ii. 

54 A Pellet, plate ii. 

55 A Pomme, plate ii. 

56 A Fountain, plate ii. 

57 A Greek Croes, plate iii . 

58 A Latin Ooss, piiUe iii. 

59 A Tau Cross, plate iii 

60 Si Andrew, plate iii. 

61 St Patrick, plate iii. 

62 St. George, plate iii. 

63 The First Union Jack, p. 26. 

64 The Second Union Jack, p. 26. 

65 A Cross Fimbriated, plate iiL 

66 A Cross surmounted by a Cnww 

plate iii. 

66 A. A Cross voided, plate iii. 

67 A Cross pointed, plate iii. 

68 A Cross patriarchal, plate iii. 

69 A Cross on Degrees, plate iii. 

70 A Cross couped, plate iiL 

71 A Maltese Cross, plate iii 

72 A Cross quadrate, plate iiL 

73 A Cross quarter pierced, plate iii. 

74 A Cross quarterly pierced, platf 



LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS. 



497 



No. 

75 A Groaa Moline, plate lii. 

76 A Cross Recercel^ plate iiL 

77 A Cross Patonce» plate iii. 

78 The Confessor — St. Edward, 

plate i. 

79 A Cross Fleurie, plate iii. 

80 A Cross Flcurettee, plate iii. 

81 A Cross Pomm^, plate iii. 

82 A Cross Fourchde, plate iii. 

82 A. A Cross Urd^ p. 30. 

83 A Cro^s Crosslet, plate iii. 

84 A Cross Crosalet Fitchee, plate iii. 

85 A Cross Patee, plate iii. 

86 A Cross Patee Fitch^ plate iii. 

87 A Cross Botonee, plate iii. 

88 A Cross Boton^ Fitchee, plate 

iii. 

89 A Cross Potent, plate iii. 

90 A Cross Potent Fitchee, plat« iii. 

91 A Cross Potent Quadrate, plate 

iii. 

92 A Cross Engrailed, plate iii. 

93 A Cross Undee, plate iii. 

94 A Cross Ragule'e, plate iii. 

95 Five Fusils in Cross, plate iii. 

96 A Canton, plate iv. 

97 A Gyron, plate iv. 

98 An Inescutcheon, plate iv. 

99 Mortimer, p. 31. 
99 A. Mortimer, p. 31. 

100 An Orle, plate iv. 

101 De Valence, plates v., vii., and 

zxxviii. 

102 A Tressure, plate iv. 

103 Scotland, plate v. 

104 A Lozenge, plate Iv. 

105 A FusU, plate iv. 

106 A Frette, plate iv. 

106 A. Frettee, plate iv. 

107 Le Do Spencer, plate v. 

108 Flanches, plate iv. 

108 A. Flasques, plate iv. 

109 A Mascle, plate iv. 

110 A Rustre, plate iv. 

111 A BUlet. plate iv. 

112 A Label, plate iv. 

113 A Bordure, plate iv. 

114 A Bordure engrailed, plate iv. 

115 A Bordure indented, plate iv. 

115 A. Shield— Whitworth Effigy, p. 34. 

116 Brittany— De Dreux, plate v. 

117 Gyronny, plate iv. 

118 Gyronny of six, plate iv. 

119 Lozengy, plate iv. 

120 FusUly, plate iv. 

121 De Grey, p. 35. 

121 A. Paly of 8, plate iv. 
121b. Bendy of 8, plate iv. 

122 Barry Bendy, plate iv. 

123 Paly Bendy, plate iv. 



No. 
124 
125 

126 
127 
127 a. 
127 b. 

127 c. 

128 
129 
129 a. 
129 b. 
129 0. 
130 
131 
131a. 
132 
132 a. 
132 b. 
132 e. 
133 
1.33 A. 
134 

134 a. 
135 

135 a. 
136 

136 a. 
136 n. 

136 c. 
137 

137 a. 
138 

138 a. 



139 

140 

141 

14? 

143 

144 

144 a. 

144 b. 

145 

146 

146 a. 

146 b. 

147 

148 

149 
150 
151 
152 

152 a. 
153 

153 a. 



A Bordure Compony, plate iv. 
Bordure Counter Compony, plate 

Cheque, plate iv. 

Sir Robert de Chandos, plate vi. 

Percy — Beverley, plate vi. 

De Warrenne — Castle Acre, plate 

vi. 
De Warrenne — Beverley, plate 

vi. 
Flag of the Admiralty, p. 39. 
Six Annulets, plate viii. 
Arrows, plate viii. 
Bannerman, plate 'viii. 
Three Battenng Rams, plate viii 
A Fire Beacon, plate viii. 
Breys, plate viii. 
De Geneville, plate xiv. 
A Buckle, plate viii 
A Buckle and Strap, plate viii. 
Thomas Rooelyn, plate Ixix. 
Pelham, p. 436. 
A Caltrap, plate viii. 
A Chapeau, plate viiL 
An Escarbuncle, plate viii. 
An Escarbuncle, plate viii. 
Castile and Leon — Queen Alia- 

nore, plate i. 
A Castle, plate viii. 
A Chess-Rook, plate viii. 
A Cinquefoil, plate viii. 
A Clarion, plate viii. 
Fitz Simon, plate Ixix. 
A Clarion, plate viiL 
Cups, plate viii. 
Cushions, plate viii. 
Cushions— De Bohun Brass, plate 

XV. 

City of London, p. 54. 

An Estoile, plate viii. 

A Winnowing Fan, plate viii. 

A Fetter-Lock, plate viii. 

A Fylfot Cross, plate viii. 

lyAubeny, plate Ixix. 

Crest of Hope, plate xxvi. 

Crest of Drake, plate xxvi. 

Gauntlets, plate viii. 

Gurges, plate viii. 

John Martell, plate Ixix. 

De Hursthelve, plate Ixix. 

A Hawk's Luie, plate ix. 

A Hawk's Bell and Jesses, plate 

ix. 
A Hemp-Brake, plate ix. 
A Hunting Horn, plate ix. 
A Lymphad, plate ix. 
A Maunche, plate ix. 
A Maunche, plate ix. 
A Mill-Rind, plale ix. 
A Guy Ferre, plate Ixix. 
2 K 



498 



LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS. 



No. 

154 A Mullet, plate ix. 

155 A Mullet of six points, plate ix. 

156 De Vere. pluto vi. 

157 A Mullet pierced, plate ix. 

158 A Pall, plate ix. 

158 A. John Bourdon, plate Ixix. 

159 A Pastoral Staff, plate xt. 

160 A Crazier, plate xv. 

161 A Penner and Inkhorn, plate ix. 

162 A Pheon, plate ix. 

163 A Portcullis, plate ix. 

164 A Quatrefoil and Shield, plate 

XV. 

164 A. A Scaling-Ladder, p. 51. 

164 B. A Lozenge-Panel and Shield, 

plate XY. 

165 A Seax, plate ix. 

166 A Shakefork, plate ix. 

167 Hay, p. 54. 

168 The Trinity House, plate xiv. 

169 A Pryck-Spur. plate ix. 

170 A Wheel-Spur, plate ix. 

171 A Rou(;lle-Spur, plate ix. 

172 A Gmirdod-Spur, plate ix. 

173 The Earl Poulett, pUte xiv. 

173 A. A Tower, plate ix. 

174 A Trelise, plate ix. 

175 A Trampet, plate ix. 

176 Water Bongets, pkte ix. 

176 A. Isle of Man, plate xiv. 

177 The Badge of Ulster, plate ix. 

177 A. Douglas, plate xiv. 

178 A Liun Passant, plate x. 

179 A Lion Passant Guardant, plate 

X. 

179 A. A Lion Passant Reguardant, 
plate X. 

179 B. A Lion Passant Guardant, plate 

X. 

180 A Lion Rampant, plate x. 

180 A. A lion Rampant, plate x. 

181 A Lion Rampant Guardant, plate 

X. 

182 A Lion Rampant Reguardant, 

plate X. 

183 A Lion Salient, plate x. 

184 Two Lions Comtxitant, plate x. 

185 The Percy Lion, p. 55. 

186 The Howard Lion, p. 55. 

187 A Lion Sejant, plate x. 

187 A. A Lion Sejant Rampant, plate x. 
187 B. A Lion Couchant, plate x. 

187 c. A Lion Coward, p. 5I&gt;. 

188 A Demi-Lion Rampant, plute x. 

189 A Lion's Face, plate x. 

190 A Lion's Head, couped, plate x. 

191 A Lion's Head, erased, plate x. 

192 A Lion s Jambe, plate x. 

193 Two Lions Rampant, addorsed, 

plate X. 



No. 



194 
195 

186 

197 

198 

199 

199 a 

200 

201 



(Comwall, plate v. 
A Lion Rampant, crowned, 
plate X. 
A Lion Rampant, holding a 

Spear, plate x. 
A Lion gorged with a Coronet. 

plute X. 
A Lion queue fouroh^, plato x. 
England, p. 61. 

The Earl of Pembroke, plutt- x. 
An Ermine, p. 62. 
Longespee, p. 89. 
De Bohun, plate xx. 

201 A. De Wheathamstede, plate xv. 

202 A Stag at go^e, plate xi. 

203 A Stag tripping, plate xi. 

203 A. A Stag at speed, plate xL 

204 A Stag lodged, plate xi. 

205 A Stag's Head caboeaed, plaU- xi. 
205 A. Stanley, plate xiv. 

205 B. Cavendian. plate xiv. 

206 A Bear and Ragged Staff, pluv. 

XXX. 

207 A Talbot Dog, plate xi. 

208 Jessant-de-lya, plate xL 

208 A. Jessant-de-lys reversed, ^te xi. 

209 A Bird soaring, plate xi. 

210 Wings in lurc, plate xL 

211 Wings erect, plate xi. 

212 A Bird trussing another, plate xi. 
212 A. An eagle displayed, plate xi. 
212 B. An Eagle with two heads, pUt 

xi. 

212 c. Richard, Earl of GomwaU. pUtr 

Ixii. 

213 A Pelican in its Piety, plate xi. 

214 A Swan chained, plate xL 

215 A Bird closed, plato xi. 

216 A MarUct, plate xi. 

216 A. A Martlet, pkte xi. 

217 A Fish naXant^ plate xi. 

218 A Fish hauriaut, plate xi. 

218 A. A Fish uriant, plate xL 

219 A Dolphin embowed, plate 3lL 

219 A. A Dolphin, p. 66. 

220 An Escallop Shell, plaU* xi. 

221 A Cockatrice, plate xii. 

222 Crest — Dagworth, plate x.L 

222 A. Crest — Elmebriggo, plate xii 

223 A Dragon, plato xii. 

223 A. A Dragon Standard^ plate xii 

224 A Griffin, plate xii. 

225 A Mermaio, plate xii. 

225 A. A Collar of Mermaids, p. G5i^ 

226 A Merman, plate xii. 

227 A Wyvem, plate xii. 
227 A. A Unicom, plate xiL 
227 B. A Pegasus, plate xii. 
227 c. A Phoonix, plate xii. 
227 D. A Salamander, p. 69. 



LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS. 



499 



No. 

228 The Sun in splendour, plate xii. 

229 Bays of the Sun, plate xii 

230 Crescent, plate xii. 

231 Docrescent, plate xii. 

232 Increscent, plate xii. 

233 A Ginquefoil, plate xii. 

234 Black Prince— Shield of Peace, 

p. 70. 
234 A. A Feather Badge— Black Prince, 
plate xii 

234 B. Swan and Feather— De Bohun, 

plate xii. 

235 Feather and Scroll— Worcester, 

plate xii. 

235 A. Pnnce of Wales' Plume— Mo- 

dem, plate XV. 

236 A Fleur-de-lys, from tiles, plate 

xiii. 
236 A. A Fleur-de-lys, from tiles, plate 
xiii. 

236 B. A Fleur-de-lys, from tiles, plate 

xiii. 

237 A Fleur-de-lya— Windsor, plate 

XV. 

237 A A Fleurde-lys — Monument of 

Edward IIL, plate xv. 

238 A Flenr-de-lys, on Sword and 

Sceptre, plate xiii. 

238 A A Seal of Louis VIII., p. 404. 

239 Leveson. p. 70. 
239 A. Chester, p. 70. 
239 B. A Garbe, plate xiL 

239 c. A Slip of Oak. plato xii. 

240 Planta Genista, plate xii. 

241 A Rose, plate xiii. 

241 A A Bose, Pulham Church, p. 76. 

242 A Rose— Worcester, p. 293. 

242 A. A White Rose of York, plate xiii. 

243 A Rose^n-Soleil- Worcester, p. 

293. 

244 A Sixfoil, plate xiiL 

245 The Stock of a Tree, plate xiii. 

246 A Trefoil slipped, plate xiii. 

247 A Tudor Rose— Worcester, p. 

293. 

248 A York and Lancastrian Rose 

crowned, plate xiii. 

248 A A White Rose-en-Soleil, plate xiii. 

249 Byron, p. 77. 

250 Gouttee, p. 77. 

251 Gouttee, p. 77. 

252 Mantelce, plate xiii. 

253 A Saltire trononee, plate xiii. 

254 The Coronet of a Baron, p. 94. 

255 Canterbury impaling Kempe, 

plate xiv. 

256 Contoise— Aymer de Valence, 

plate XV. 

257 Baainet— Sir H. Oalveley, plate 



No. 

257 A. A Crest Coronet, p. 265. 

258 Basinet— Ralph de Neville, plate 

xvi, 

259 Hehn and Crest— Richard I.. 

plate xxvi. 

260 Helm and Crestr-H. de Bohun, 

plate xxvi. 

261 Helm and Crest-Sir J. Loutrell 

plate xxvi. 

262 Hehn and Crest— Edward HI., 

plate xxvi. 

263 Hehn and Crest— Black Prince, 
' plate xxvi. 

264 Helm and Crest— Edward de 

Thorpe, p. 110. 

265 Hehn and Crest- R. de Beau- 

champ, plate xii. 

266 Crest— Lord Stourton, plate 

xxvi. 

267 Helm and Crest— Sir William de 

Bryenne, plate xxvi. 
267 A. Crest— Lord Ferrers of Chartley. 
plate xxvi. 

267 B. Two Crests of Tyndall, p. 272. 

268 Crest Coronet— Sir T. Bromflete. 

plate xxvi. 

269 Crest of Mortimer, plate xxvi. 

270 Seal— Mortimer, p. 418. 

270 A. Seal— Edm. de ArunJel, p. 271. 

418. 

271 St. Edmond, plate xiv. 

272 A Mural Crown, p. 99. 

273 A Nuval Crown, p. 99. 

274 A Vallary Crown, p. 99. 

275 An Eastern Crown, p. 99. 

276 The Coronet of a Duke, p. 101. 

277 Basinet-John of Eltham, plate 

xvi 

277 A. Basinet— John of Eltham, plate 

xvi. 

278 Fillet— William of Hatfield, plate 

xvi 

279 Basinet— Black Prince, plate 

xvi. 
279 A. Basinet — ^Black Prince, plate 
xvi. 

279 B. Basinet— Black Prince, p. 102. 

280 Coronet — John de la Polo, plate 

xvi. 

281 The Coronet of an Earl, p. 104. 

281 A Coronet of an Earl, plate Ixiv. 

282 Coronet— I":arl of Arundel, p. 1 05. 

283 Coronet— Earl of Arundel, p. 1 05. 

283 A. Coronet— Countess of Arundel, 

plate xii. 

284 Coronet— Countess of Essex, 

plate xii 

285 Coronetr-Sir T. Ikiloyn, plate 

xU. 

286 Edward III., p. 333. 

2 K 2 



mBil«R 



600 



LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS. 



-with Garter, plate xiv. 
and Mortimer, plate 



Gamoys, plate 



No. 

287 Gamoys- 

288 Camoya 

xiv. 
288 A. Garter— Lord 

zliii. 
9ftft Henry V., plate xiv. 

Garter— John de la Pole, plate 

xliv. 
Yorkist Collar — Lord Haroourt, 

plate xliv. 
Garter— Lady Haroourt, plate 

xliv. 
A Gonfaunon, plate xxix. 
Modem Helm — Sovereign, p. 

no. 

Modem Helm — Princes, p. 110. 

Modem Helm— Knights, p. 111. 

Modem Helm — Esauires, p. 111. 

Crown of Herald King-of-Arms, 
p. 357. 

The Duke of Norfolk, p. 428. 
^.. Effigy of Lady Tiptoft, plate xvii. 
800 A. Tiptoft, plate xviL 
300 B. Powys, plato xvil 

300 c. Tiptoft and Powys, plate xvii. 

301 Harsyck, plate i. 

302 The Coronet of a Marque88.p. 117. 

303 A Merchant's Mark, plate xiii. 
The Merchants of the Staple, 

plate xiii. 
The Merchants Adventurers, 

plate xiii. 
A Mitre, p. 119. 
A Mitre, p. 119. 

The Mitre of the Bishop of Dur- 
ham, p. 119. 
Three Mitres, p. 90. 
Pennon— Sir J. D'Aubemoun, 

plate xxix. 
Shield of St. George, Elsyng 

Brass, plate xxix. 
Standard— Edward IH., plate 

xxix. 
Standard — Earl of Warwick, 

plato XXXV. 
Standard— Henry of Bolingbroke. 

p. 286. 
Standard — Henry VHI., plate 

xxix. 
Standard — Henry VIII., plate 

xxix. 
The Coronet of a Viaoount, p. 

133. ^ 

A Crest Wreath, plate xv. 

318 A. A Crest Wreath in perspective, 

plate XV. 

319 Stafford impaling Butler, plate 

xxiv. 
319 A. Stafford, plate xxiv. 
319 B. Butler, pkte xxiv. 



290 

291 

292 

293 
294 

295 
296 
297 
298 

299 
300 



304 

305 

306 
307 
308 

309 
310 

311 

312 

313 

314 

315 

316 

317 

ai8 



No. 

320 Cornwall dimidiates Glare, plate 
xviii. 

320 A. Clare dimidiateslFitzgenild, plato 

Ixxx. 

321 Cornwall impales Clare, plate 

xviii. 

322 England dimidiates France, plate 

xviiL 

323 France Ancient and Na?arre, 

plate xviii. 

324 Dimidiated Shield— Cliessman, 

plate xviii. 

325 De Valence dimidiates Claxe- 

monte. plate xviii. 

325 A Alianore Ferre. plat6 kxs. 

326 Great Yarmouth, plate xviii. 
326 A. The Cinque Ports, plate Izxx. 

326 B. Chester City, plate Ixxx. 

327 Seal— Alice d'Avesno. plate 

xviiL 

328 Seal — Peter Tederade, plate 

xviii. 

329 Seal-^oan de Barre, p. 150. 
329 A. De Barre, plate xix. 

329 B. Diagram of Seal of Bobt de 
St Quintin, p. 152. 

329 c. Seal^John de Wanenne, [plate 

Ixxxi. 

330 Tw9 Small Shields of Essex, plate 

XX. 

331 Secretum— Thos. Duke of Gba- 

cester, p. 152. 

332 John of Eltham, plate six. 
332 A. Seal — Queen Margaret, plate 

Ixxxi. 

332 b. Seal — Wm. de Clmton, plate 

Ixxxi. 

333 Milo of Herefoixi, plate xx. 

334 Her Majesty the Queen, p. 332. 

335 Arnold de Gaveston, pkte lis. 
335 A. Isabel le, Queen of Edward H 

p. 135. 
335 b. Piers de Gaveston, plate xix. 

335 0. Champagne, p. 170. 

336 Edward III.— Lmoob, plate 

xxxiv. 

337 England, and Hainault, p. 159. 

338 Effi^ of John de Hastiags, plate 

xxi. 

338 A. Shield of John de Hastings, p. 

172. 

339 The Black Prince, Linooto, pUte 

xxxiv. 

340 Woodstock and De Bohon, plite 

XX. 

341 De Bohun and FitzAlan, phtext 

342 Thomas de HoUand of Eeot 

plate xxii. 

343 Tiptoft, Holland, and Fo«7&amp; 

plate xxii. 



LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS. 



601 



No. 

344 Impaled Shield of James II. of 

Scots, plate xxii. 

345 The Countess of Lennox, plate 

xxii. 

346 The Countess of Bichmond, plate 

xxii. 

346 A. Edmond Tudor impaling Beau- 

fort, plate xxii. 

347 Seal— Henry of Bolingbroke, p. 

165. 

348 Heniy IV. and Navarre, plate 

xxiii. 

349 Bichard II. and Bohemia, plate 

xxiii. 

350 Bichard IL and France, plate 

xxiii. 

351 Henry VII. and Elizabeth of 

York, plate xxiii. 

352 Henry VI. and Margaret of 

Anjou, plate xxiii. 

353 H.H.R. the late Prince Consort, 

p. 314. 

354 Stafford and Butler, plate xxiv. 

355 Stallbrd and Butler, plate xxiv. 

356 " Campbell, plate xxiv. 

357 Stafford, Butler, and Campbell, 

plate xxiv. 

358 Stafford, Butler, and Campbell, 

plate xxiv. 

359 Stafford, Butler, and Campbell. 

plate xxiv. 

360 Bentinck, plate xxiv. 

361 Stafford, Butler, Campbell, and 

Bentinck, plate xxiv. 

362 Bentinck impaling Stafford, But- 

ler, and Campbell, plate xxiv. 

362 A. Coronet of a Marquess, plate 

Ixiv. 

363 Bentinck with Stafford, Butler 

and Campbell in pretence, plate 
xxiv. 

364 Bentinck quartering Stafford, 

Butler and Campbell, plate 
xxiv. 

364 A. Powys and Holland, plate xxiii. 

365 Fumival, plate xxv. 

366 De la Zouche, plate xxv. 

366 A. Do la Zouche, plate Ixvii. 
866 B. De la Zouche, plate Ixvii. 

367 Newburgh, plate xxv. 

368 De Beauchamp, plate xxv. 

369 De Beauchamp, plate xxv. 

370 De Beauchamp, plate xxv. 

371 Do Beauchamp, plate xxv, 

372 De Cliffurd, plate xxv. 

373 De Clifford, plate xxv. 

374 De Bos, plate xxvii. 

375 De Trumpingdon, plate xlviii. 

376 De Balliol, plate xxvii. 

377 De Cobham, plate xxv. 



No. 

378 De Cobham, plate xxv. 

379 De Cobham, plate xxv. 

379 A. A Label of Modem Cadency, 

plate xiii. 

380 Crescent of Modem Cadency, 

plate xiii. 

381 Mullet of Modem Cadency, plate 

xiii. 

382 Martlet of Modem Cadency, plate 

xiii. 

383 Annulet of Modem Cadency, 

plate xiii. 

384 Fleur-de-lys of Modem Cadency, 

plate xiii. 

385 "Rose of Modem Cadency, plate 

xiii. 

386 Cross Moline of Modem Cadency, 

plate xiii. 

387 Octo-foil of Modem Cadency, 

plate xiii. 

388 FUz Nichol, plates xxvii and 

xlviii. 
388 A. De Umphraville, plate xxvii. 
388 B. W. Bardolph, plate xxvii. 
388 o. T. Bardolph. plate xxvii. 
388 D. Cross - Crosslet fleurie, plate 

xlviii. 
388 E. Cross - Crosslet boton^ plate 

xlviii. 
388 p. lyArcy, plate xxvii. 
388 Q. D"Arcy, plate xxvii. 
388 H. D'Arcy, plate xxvii. 
388 I. D'Arcy. plate xxvii. 
388 K. D'Arcy, platd Ixxi. 

388 L. D'Arcy, plate Ixxi. 

389 De Saltmarsh, plate xxxvii. 
300 De Brewys, plate xxxvii. 

390 A. De Brewys, plate Ixvii. 

390 B. De Faucombe, plate Ixvii. 

391 De Swvnbome, plate xxxvii. 
391 A. Sir T. Dalton, plate Ixvii. 

391 B. John de Warre, plate Ixvii. 

392 De Berkeley, plate xxxvii. 

393 De Berkeley, plate xxxvii. 

394 Howard Ancient, plate xxxvii. 

395 Grimstone, plate xxxvii. 

396 Grcvillo, plate xxxvii. 

397 De Bohun of Hereford, plate 

XX. 

397 A. De Bohun Seal, plate Ixx.* 

398 De Bohun of Northampton, plate 

XX. 

398 A. De Bohun Seal, plate Ixx. 

399 Do Montfort, plate xlix. 

400 Clynton, plate xxxvii. 
4fK) A. Cljrnton, plate Ixvii. 

401 Ughtred, plate xxxvii. 
401 A. Ouchtred, plate Ixvii. 

401 B. Oittrich, plate Ixvii. 

402 Basset, plate xxxvii. 



602 



LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS. 



No. 

403 Bassett, plate xxzvii. 

404 St. John, plate xxviii. 

404 A. St. John, plate xxviii. 

405 Daubygnd, plate zxviii. 

406 Daubygne, plate xxviii. 

407 Daubvgn^ plate xxviii. 

408 Daubygn^, p. 134. 

408 A. Daubygne, plate Ixxiii. 

409 Graham, plate xxviii. 

410 Deinoourt, plate xlviii. 

411 Haydon, plate xlviii. 

412 De Merley, plate xlviii. 

412 A. De Paynell, plate Ixvii. 

413 De Bonn, plate xlviii. 
413 A. De VttUfl, plate Ixviii. 

413 c. Sir John Mounteuey, plate Ixviii. 

414 De Valence, plate xxxviii. 

415 De Valence, plate xxxviii. 

416 De Valence, plate xxxviii. 

417 De Valence, plate xxxviii. 

418 De Valence, plate xxxviii. 

419 De Cliaworth, xxxviii. 

420 De Cbaworth, xxxviii. 

421 De Chaworth, xxxviii. 

422 Fitz Ralph, plate xxxix. 

423 De Peyver, plate xxviii. 

424 De Deyville, plate xxviii. 
424 A. De Deyville, plate Ixviii. 

424 B. John Neville, plate Ixviii. 

425 Shield at Selby, plate xxviiL 
425 A. Shield at Abergavenny, plate 

xxxix. 

425 B. Giffard, plate xxxix. 

426 De Rachecourte, plate xxviii. 
426 A. Hakebut, plate Ixviii. 

426 B. Bromflete, plate xxxix. 

426 c. De Cantelupe, plate xxxix. 

427 De Beanmonte, plate xxviii.* 
427 A. De Ryther, plate xxxviii. 

427 B. Parys, plate xxxviii. 

428 De Potenhall, plate xxviii. 

429 Lothian, plate xxxii. 

429 A. Lothian, j)late Ixxi. 

430 Edward U., as Prince Royal, plate 

xlv. 

431 De Tressell, plate xxxviii. 

432 De Fitz William, plate xlix. 

432 A. Ehnebrigge, plate xlix. 

433 Sir John de Cornwall, K.G., plate 

li. 

434 Estofford, plate 1. 

435 De WeUe, plate 1. 

435 A. De Tmssell. plate 1. 

436 St. Amand, plate 1. 

437 Wake, plate 1. 

438 De Courtenay, plate 1. 

439 De BascreviUe, plate 1. 

440 De Vinont, pUite 1. 

440 A. Avenel, plate Ixix. 

441 De Quinoey, plate xlix. 



No. 

442 Le Blond, plate 1. 

443 De Borgh. plate 1. 

444 De Vaux, plate 1. 

445 De Creke, plate xlviiL 

446 De Fortibus, plate 1. 

447 De Mouncheaney, plate xlTiii. 

448 Shield from Artleme Braas, plate 

xl. 

449 De Verdon, plate xl. 

450 Mantling— Earl of Essex, plate 

li. 
450 A. Mantling-&gt;Lord Bemere, plate 

Ixv. 
450 B. Mantling— Earl Rivers, plate 

Ixiv. 

450 c. Lord Beaumont, plate bdv. 

451 Mantling - George of Clarencts 

plate IL 
451 A. Crest— John BeuQfort,K.G.,pl&amp;te 
xli. 

451 B. Sir Thomas lAncaster, plate 

Ixxii. 

452 Fyndeme, plate xl. 
452 A. De la Pole, plate xl. 

452 B. De Keville, of Salisbury, plate 

xl. 
452 c. De Neville, plate xl. 
452 D. Eleven differenced Shields of 
Neville of Raby, p. 203. 
Wm. de Lancaster, plate xL 
De Cauteville, plate xL 
Bassett, plate xl. 
Ralph, Lord Bassett, K.G., pUte 

De Kendall, plate xL 
Fitz Marmaduke, plate xl. 
Grandison, plate xlix. 
Grandison, plate xlix. 
460 A. Bishop de Grandison, plate 

Ixxiii. 
St. Qnintin, plate xxvii. 
St. Quintin, plate xxvii. 
De Ferrers, plate li. 
Montbourchier, plate li. 
Le Dcspencer, plate li. 
John de Wheathamstede, plate IL 
Do Lacy, plate xlix. 
Ermine Label — St Alban's, pkte 

xxxi. 
Ermine Label— Gt Yanoonth. 

plate xxxi. 
Edward I, as Prince BovaU p. 

173. 
Henry of Lancaster, p. 173, 
Label of York, Groat Yarmouth, 

plate xxxi. 
Label of George, Duke of Cla- 
rence, plate xxxi. 
Label of Richarrl of York, plati- 

xxxi. 



453 
454 
455 
456 

457 
458 
459 
460 



461 
462 
463 
464 
465 
466 
467 
468 

469 

470 

471 
472 

473 

474 



LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS. 



603 



No. 

475 
476 
477 
477 a. 

478 

471) 
480 
481 

482 
483 . 

484 

485 
48G 

487 

488 
488 a. 

489 

41)0 
491 
492 
493 

494 
495 
496 
497 

408 
499 

499 a. 

500 
501 

502 
503 
503 a. 
504 

505 

506 

507 
508 
509 

510 



Holland of Kent, plates xxxii. 

an«l Ixv. 
Humphrey of Glo'stcr, plate 

xxxii. 
De Vera, with Bordure, plate 

xxxii. 
Holland of Exeter, plates xlv. and 

Ixv. 
Bichurd of Goningsburgh, plate 

xxxii. 
Beaufort, plate xxxii. 
Oirdinal Beaufort, plate xxxii. 
Thomna Beaufort, K.G., plato 

xxxii. 
E(hnund Tudor, plate xxxii. 
Juspar Tudor, plate xxxii. 
Thomas Beaufort, K.G., 

xxxiL 
Label of Richard U., plate xxxi. 
Henry of Bolingbrokc, p. 253. 
Henry V. as IMnco of Wales, p. 

230. 
Edmond of Lancaster, plate xW. 
Heniy, Duke of Lancaisiter, plate 

Ixiii. 
Label — ^Monument of Edvrard 

HI., plate xxxi. 
Lionel of Antwerp, plate xxxiv. 
John of Ghent, plate xxxiv. 
Edmond of Langley, plate xxxiv. 
Henry of BoUngbioke, plate 

xxxiv. 
Ermine Label, plate xxxi. 
Label of Lancaster, plate xxxiii. 
Label of York, plate xxxi. 
Label of Leon and York, plate 

xxxiii. 
Label of Castile, plate xxxiii. 
Label of Custile and Leon, plate 

xxxiii. 
Label of York and Castile, plate 

Ixxiv. 
Label of Richard UL, plate xxxi. 
Label— &lt;* Last of the Plantage- 

nets," plate xxxi. 
John Level, plate xxxiii. 
Sir Edward Montague, p. 225. 
Sir Alexander Gifiard, pUite Ixxx. 
Label — Sir H. Courtenay, plate 

xxxiii. 

Courtenay, K.G. 



Label— Sir P. 

plato xxxiii. 

Label— Sir G. 



Courtenay, plute 



Label of Latymer, p. 228. 

Label of Latymer, p. 228. 

Seal — Thomas of Glo'ster, plate 
ixx. 

Diaper — Seal of Thomas of Glo's- 
ter, p. 38. 



No. 

511 Swan Badge — De Bohmi Brass, 

p. 254. 

512 Bear and Staff Crest, plate xxx. 

513 Dacre Badge, plate xxxix. 

514 Knot — Anne of Bohemia, plate 

xxx. 

515 Stafford Knot, plate xxx. 

516 Bourchier Knot, plate xxx. 

517 Heneage Knot, plate xxx. 

518 Wake and Ormonde Knot, plate 

XXX. 

519 Bowen Knot, plato xxx. 

519 A. Great— Scott of Thirlstane, plate 

xxvi. 

520 Crest— John Duke of Bedford, 

plate xxx. 

521 Crest— John Mowbray, plate xli. 

522 Panache- Crest of John Lord 

Scrope, p. 419. 

523 Achievement of the Earl of Staf- 

ford, K.G., p. 264. 

524 Dragon Crest, Thomas of Lan- 

caster, plate XXXV. 

525 Seal of Thomas Holland, plate Ixx. 

525 A. Kirkpatrick Crest, plate xxx. 

526 Lance Flag, Bayeux Tapestry, 

plate xxix. 

527 Lance Flag, Bayeux Tapestry, 

plate xxix. 

528 Banner — Henry De Lacy, plate 

XXXV. 

529 Banner — Sir Symon de Fel- 

bryge, plate xxxv. 

530 Heraldic Sail, plate xxxv. 
5:U First Red Ensign, plate xxxvi. 

532 Second Red Ensign, plute xxxvL 

533 Present Red Ensign, plate xxxvi. 

534 St George's Ensign, plate xxxvi. 

535 Present Blue Enogn, plate xxxvi 

536 England — ^two lions j, plate Iviii. 
536 A. England, plate Iviii 

536 B. France Ajident and England, 

plate Iviii. 
536 0. Richard IL, plate IviiL 

536 D. France Modem and England, 

plate Iviii. 

537 Royal Shield of the Stuarts, plate 

Iviii. 

537 A. Ireland, plate xlvi. 

538 Nassau, plate, xlvil 

539 William UI. and Mury, plate llx. 
439 A. William III., plate lix. 

540 Arms of Queen Anne, plate lix. 

541 Hanover, plate xlvii. 

542 George I., plate lix. 

542 A. Electoral Bonnet of Hanover, 

plate Ixxvi. 

543 George IH., plate lix. 

543 A. Her Majesty the Queen, plate lix. 

544 Badge of iUcbard I., plate xlvii. 



504 



LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS. 



No. I 

545 Badge of Henry VII., plate, I 

xlvii. 

546 Badge of James 1., plate xlvii. 

547 Poutbieu, plate xlvil 

548 Crown of Ricliard I., plate xlii. 

549 Crown of Berengaria, plate xlii. 

550 Crown of Edward II., p. 317. 

551 Crown of Henry IV., p. 317. 

552 Crown of Henry V., plate xliL 

553 Crown— Henry VI.. plate xlii. 

554 Crown — ^Edward IV., plate xlii. 

555 Crown— Edward IV., (Great 

Seal), plate xlii. 

556 Crowu— Henry VII. (King's 

Chapel), p. 372. 

557 Crown— &gt;Iargaret Tudor, p. 380. 

558 Crown— Henry VIII.. plate xlii. 

559 Crown— Henry VIU. (Norwich), 

plate xlii. 

560 Crown— Charles I., xUL 

561 Crown— Charles II., plate xlii. 

562 Crown of England, p. 319. 

662 A. Crown— H.R.H. the late Prince 

Consort, p. 321. 

663 Coronet— H.R.H. the Prince of 

Wales, p. .321. 

564 Coronet — Royal Princes, plate 

xU. 

565 Coronet— Royal Princesses, plate 

xli 

566 Coronet— Royal Kinsmen, plate 

xli. 

567 Crest— Scotland, plate xlvi. 

668 Arms of H.R.H. the Prince of 
Wale?, p. 328. 

568 A. Label of H.R.H. the Prince of 

Wales, plate xxxvi. 

569 Label— H.R.H. the Prince Al- 

fred, plate xxxvi. 
670 Label— H.R.H. the Prince Ai^ 
thur, plate xxxvi. 

571 Label— H.R.H. the Prince Leo- 

pold, plate xxxvi. 

572 Label — H.R.H. the Princess 

Royal, plate xxxvi. 

573 Label — H.RJI. the Princess 

Alice, plate xxxvi. 

574 Label — H.RH. the Princess 

Helena, plate xxxvi. 

575 Label — H.R.H. the Princess 

Louisa, plate xxxvi. 

576 Label — H.RH. the Princess 

Beatrice, plate xxxvi. 

577 Label of Cambridge, plate xxxvi. 

578 Banner— Knights Hospitallers, 

plate XXXV. 

579 Banner — Knights Templars, 

(Beau-Scant), plate xxxv. 

580 Banner — Knights Templars, 

plate xxxv. 



No. 

581 Tan Badge— Sir B. de Boia, plate 

xxxix. 

582 SS. Collar— Qneen Joanna, plate 

xliii. 

582 A. Monogram and Collar of 88. — 

John Baret. p. 492. 

583 SS. CoUar— Lonl Hongerfoid. 

plate xliii. 

584 SS. Collar— Sir R de Mannion, 

plate xliii 

585 SS. Collar— Sir W. PhUip, K.G., 

plate xliii. 

585 A. SS. Collar— John Gower, plate 

xliii. 

586 Yorkist CoUai^Knight at Aflton, 

plate xliv. 

587 Yorkibt Collar— DeNevaies, plate 

xliv. 

588 Yorkifit CoUar — Countess of 

Arundel, plate xliv. 

589 Yorkist Collar— Countess of £*• 

sex, plate xliv. 

590 Garter of the Order, plate Ut. 
590 A. Star of the Garter, plate liv. 
590 B. Collar of the Garter, plate liv. 
590 o. The George, plate liv. 

590 D. The oval George, plate liv. 

691 Garter— Earl of Essex, plate 
xliii. 

591 A. Garter— Earl of Essex, pkte 

xliii. 

592 Garter— Sir T. Boleyn, plate 

xliii. 

593 Star of the Thistle, plate Iv. 
593 A. Collar of the Thistle, plate Iv. 
593 B. Jewel of the Thistle, plate Iv. 

593 0. Jewel of the Thistle, plale Iv. 

594 Collar of St Patrick, plate Ivi. 
594 A. Star of St Patrick, plate Ivi. 

594 B. Jewel of St Patrick, plate Ivi. 

595 Collar of tlie Bath, plate Ivii. 
595 A. Star of Knights, G.C.B , p 348. 
595 B. Star of Knights, K.C.B.. p 349. 
595 a Badge of the Bath, plate Ivii. 

595 D. Civil Badge of the BaUi, pUte 

Ivii. 

596 Collar of Star of India, plate lix. 
596 A. Badge of Star of India, plate lix. 

596 B. Star of Star of India, plate lix. 

597 Cross of Victoria C^oes, plate 

xlvi. 

598 Westminster Deanery and Scba A. . 

plate xlvii. 

599 Westminster Abbey, plate xlvii. 

600 Oxford University, plate xlvii. 

601 Cambridge University, plate 

xlvii. 

602 The Heralds' College, p. 422. 

603 Garter, pkite xlvi. 

604 Norroy, plate xlvi. 



LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS. 



505 



No. 

605 Glarencieiix, plate zlvi. 

606 Ulster, plate xlvi. 

607 Westminster City, plate xlvii. 

608 Sacred Symbolical Shield, p. 

396. 

609 Seal — William de Bomnare, plate 

xlv. 

610 Secrctum— Henry of Lancaster, 

p. 397. 

611 Helm — Black Prince, plate xlv. 

612 Helm— Lord Basaett. plate xlv. 

613 Howard Modem, p. 433. 

614 Duke of Wellington, p. 439. 

615 Duke of Marlborough, p. 439. 

616 Modem Hatchment, p. 445. 

617 Svord Pommel — ^Black Prince, 

p. 448. 

618 Examples of LabeU, p. 455. 

619 Heese, p. 476. 

620 The Austrian Crown, p. 471. 

621 The Prussian Crown, p. 473. 

622 Sir Rauf de Amndel, p. 438. 

623 The Stuart, plate Ixii. 

624 The Coronation Crown, p. 320. 

625 The Seton, plate Ixii. 

626 (or 627 a.) Badge of Bichard IL, 

p. 432. 

627 White Hart Badge, p. 356. 

628 Rebus— Bishop Oldham, p. 124. 

629 De Bohun Garter-plate, plate 

Ixvi. 

630 Tabard, John Fold, p. 131. 

631 John de Holland, plate Ixv. 

632 Thomas de Mowbray, plate Ixv. 
6.33 Ramryge — plate Ixxvii. 

634 Hameldene, plate Ixviii. 

635 Symon de Montiigu, plate xix. 

636 William de Montagu, plate xix. 

636 A. Simon de Montagu, plate xix. 

637 Holland Ancient, plate Ixv. 

638 Beaumonte, plate IxviiL 

639 Bigot, plate Ixxi. 

640 Plompton, plate Ixxi. 

641 Hemenhale, plate Ixxi. 

642 Acres, plate Ixxi. 

643 De Erpingham, plate Ixviii. 

644 Wassingstone, plate IxxL 

645 Balliol, plate Ixvii. 

646 Segrave, plate Ixxii. 

647 D'Estlee, plate Ixxii. 

648 Mountpynzon, plate Ixxii. 

649 De Peche, plate Ixxii. 

650 Sir W. Philip, K.G., plate Ixxii. 

651 De Wellyngtone, plate Ixxi. 

652 Sir J. de Ilarpenaon, plate Ixxii. 

653 Sir W. de Warren, plate Ixxi, 

654 De Bassett, plate Ixxi. 

655 De Segrave, plate Ixvii 

656 Fragment of Shield, Whatton, p. 

213. 



No. 

657 Shield, Clehongre, p. 379. 

658 Shield— Gorleston, plate Ixxiii. 

659 De Badlesmere, plate Ixxiii. 

660 L'Estrange, plate Ixii. 

661 De Hastings, plate bdL 

662 Talbot, plate ixii. 

663 Courtcnay, Earl of Devon, plate 

Ixii. 

664 Arclibishop Courtenay, plate 

Ixxiii. 

665 Bishop Stapledon, plate Ixxiii. 

666 Bishop Le Despencer, plate 

Ixxiii. 

667 Seal— Neville, p. 458. 

668 Seal— Neville, p. 458. 

669 Audele, plate Ixxiv. 

670 Lovel, plate Ixxiv. 

671 De la Vache, plate Ixxiv. 

672 Tradinge, plate Ixxiv. 

673 Bourchier, plate Ixxiv. 

674 Courtenay, plate Ixxiv. 

675 Courtenay, plate Ixxiv. 

676 Captal de Buch, plate Ixxiv. 

677 The Emperor, plate Ixxvi. 

677 A. The Emperor, p. 452. 

678 The Emperor, plate Ixxvi. 

678 A. The Emperor, p. 464. 

679 Shakspeare, plate Ixix. 

680 Chaucer, plate Ixix. 

681 Gower, plate Ixix. 

682 De Topcliffe, plate Ixix. 

683 Seal— Jaspar Tudor, p. 413. 

684 Feather Badge, plate Ixxvi. 

684 A. Slab of Henry I V.— Venice, plate 

Ixxix. 

685 Feather Badge, plate Ixxvi. 

686 Feather Badge, plate Ixxvi. 

687 Diagram — Denmark, p. 326. 

688 Feather Badge, p. 259. 

689 Feather Badge, p. 259. 

690 Heraldic Roses, plate Ixxvi. 

691 Crest— St. Quintin. p. 270. 

692 Crest— D'Eresby, p. 270. 

693 Crest — Lysle, plate Ixiv. 

694 Crest — Arundel, plate Ixiv. 

695 Bourohier-Knot, p. 285. 

696 The Prince of Wales, plate Ix. 

697 Arms of Wales, plate Ix. 

698 Arms of Wales, plate Ix. 

699 Arms of Wales, plate Ix. 

700 St. John— Seal, p. 463. 

701 St. John— Seal, p. 46.3. 

702 Thurston— Seal, p. 404. 

703 Le Vavasour— Seal, p. 404. 

704 Sir J. Bardolf— Seal, p. 406. 

705 Lady Bardolf— Seal. p. 406. 

705 A. Eliz. D'Araori — Seal, plate Ixxxi. 

706 Lady Filliol— Seal, p. 406. 

707 Earl of Arundel— Seal, p. 416. 
707 A. Richard, Earl of Arundel, p. 26S. 



r)0(; 



LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS. 



No. 

708 Beatrice, Oountess Arandel, p. 

480. 

709 Denmark — ^Frederick II.. plate 

Ixxv. 

710 Denmark — Princess of Wales, 

plate Ixxv. 

711 Ram's Head— St. Alban's, plate 

Ixxvii. 

712 Ram's C^jUnr— St. Alban's, plate 

Ixxvii. 

713 Shield with Eagle— St. Alban's. 

plate Ixxviii. 

714 Shield with 3 Crowns, plate 

Ixxviii. 

715 Shield — Ramryge, plate Ixxviii. 

716 Shield— St. Alban's. p. 455. 

717 Wlieat-ear Badge, p. 457. 

718 The Prince of Wales, p. 329. 



No. 
719 

720 
721 
722 
723 

724 

725 
720 
727 

728 

729 

730 
731 



Lozenge of Scotland and Den- 
mark, plate Ixii. 

The Prince of Wales, plate Ixiii. 

Two Ermine-spots, p. 454. 

Gueldres, plate Ixii. 

]^unguldas Nuthoobhoj, &lt;^ Bcnn- 
bay, p. 371. 

Cowasjee Jchanghier, of Bombaj, 
p. 447. 

Molesworth, p. 229. 

Astley. Baron Hastings, p. 229. 

Harpur Crewe, p. 229. 

Seal — Robert de Vere, plate 
Ixxxii. 

Seal — William de Montacnte, 
plate Ixxxii. 

Neville Ancient, p. 481. 

Curw'tjee Furdoonjee Pamk, of 
Bombay, p. 506. 




IX'GOO P'CONSCIENCEISA-SUREDEFENCEn 

No. 731.— Ci'RSJBTJEE FrRDOONJEE Patuk, of Bombay. 
See p. 446. 



INDEX. 



AbatemeQi, 77, 90, 430 ; of Illegitimacy, 
436. 

Abbot, George, Archbishop of Canter- 
bury, 76. 

Abbot's Staff, 48. 

Abbreviations, 19, 423. 

Abercom, the Marquis of, 46. 

Abergavenny, the Earl of, 207, 280. 

Abergavenny, Slab at, 189. 

Abeyance, 90. 

Abingdon, the Earl of, 40, 207. 

Abinger, the Baron, 66. 

X bouche, 14. 

Accessories of Shields of Arms, 170 ; 
differenced, 198. 

Accol^, 469. 

Accosted, 77. 

Accrued, 77. 

Achievement uf Arms, 91, 115; on 
Seals, 268 ; the Boyal, 381. 

Acorn, 76, 262. 

Acre, Sir Wm. d', 192. 

Acre, Sir Simon d", 192. 

Addorsed, 77. 

Adelaide, of Saxe-Meinengen,313. 

Admirals, their Flags, 291 ; Early Seals 
of, 412. 

Admiralty Flag, 39. 

Adventurers, Merchants, 867 ; of Bris- 
tol, 368. 

iEschylus ; his Theban Heraldry, 13. 

Aflfrontee, 77, 82. 

Agulon, Robert, 189. 

Alant, 63. 

Albany Herald, 112. 

Albemarle, D'Aumale, William de 
Fortibus, Earl of, 198. 

Albemarle, Edward Plantagcnct, Duko 
of, 243. 

Albert, H.R.H., the late Prince Consort : ' 
his Arms, 162, 252, 314 ; Crest, 315 ; 
Supporters, 315 ; Motto, 315; Coronet, 
321. 

Allvrt Edward, H.R.H., the Prmce of 
Wales, K.G., K.S.I. ; his Isabel, 252 ; 
Arms, 322; Arms of the Second 
Order, 323; Arms marshalled and 



blazoned in full, 324; Anns mai^ 
shalled "by Authority," 327; De- 
signs for marshalling his Arms, 329, 
3.30; Arras marshalled by Scottish 
Heralds, 331; his Supporters, 323* 
his Crest, 323; his Motto, 321, 823; 
his Coronet, 321, 823 ; his Badg6 of 
Wales, 260, 821, 323; his Arms, im- 
pahng Denmark Proper, 327. 

Albert Victor, H.R.H., of Wales, 252. 

Alen9on, John Plantagenet, Duke of, 
244. 

Alen9on, Due d*, 470. 

Alexander I.,Czar of Russia, K.G., 473. 

Alexander III., of Scotland, 32. 

Alexandra, H.R.H., of Denmark, the 
Princess of Wales, 811 ; her Arms, 
325, 326, 327. 

Alfred, H.R.H. the Prince, 252, 331. 

Alianore, of Aquitaine, 293, 306 ; her 
Crown, 315. 

Alianore de Bohun. 8m Bohun. 

Alianore, of Castile and Leon ; her Arms, 
38, 42, 806; the first in England to 
quarter A^rms, 157 ; her Seals, 157 ; 
her Crown, 265, 816 ; her Monument, 
382, 384, 387. 

Alianore Holland, 114, 389. 

Alianore, of Lorraine, 226. 

Alianore Plantagenet, 408 

Alianore, of Provence, 306. 

Alice, H.R.H., the Princess, 252. 831 . 

Alice, Countess of Eu, 405. 

AUerion, 67. 

Allerton Mauleverer, Brass at, 262. 

All Souls' College, Oxford, 358, 361. 

Altenberg, Arms of, 813. 

Amelia, the Princess, 251. 

Amori, Roger d', 406. 

Anachronisms in Modem Monuments, 
881. 

Anchor, 39. 

Ancient Rome, the Elaglo of, 8, 472. 

*• Ancient Scottish Seals," Mr. Laing's 
excellent Work on, 456. 

Andeville, Arms of, 409. 

" Anecdotes of Heraldry,' 456. 



508 



INDEX. 



Angel (the coin), 417. 

Angela, a8 Supporters, 66, 490. 

Angcnne, 39, 75. 

Angoul^me, Arms of, 306, 393. 

Angouleme, Isabel of, 306. 

Angoulcme, Louise, Duchess of, 468. 

Angouleme, Due d*, 470. 

Angus, William, Earl of, 184. 

Anhalt, Arms of, 313. 

Animals, Heraldic, 61 ; as Accessories 

of Shields of Arms on Seals, 276. 
Animate Being?, 55. 
Anjou, Arms of, 307. 
Anjou, Jolm Plantagenet, Duke of, 

224. 
Anjou, Margaret of, 165, 363 ; her quar- 
tered Arms, 307. 
Anlaby, Alnack d', 190. 
Annandale, the Marquis of, 51 ; Crest 

of, 274. 
Anhe, of Bohemia, 166 ; her Arms, 307 ; 

Iier Effigy, 38, 259, 284. 
Anno Boleyn, her Badges, 305 ; her 

augmented and quartered Arms, 309. 
Anne, of Burgundy, 244. 
Anne, ofCleve8,309. 
Anne, of Denmark, 251 ; her Arms, 310. 
Anne Neville, 166 ; her Arms, 308. 
Anne Plantagenet, of Woodstock, 226. 
Anne Plantagenet, of York, 434. 
Anne Stuart--Queen Anne, 251 ; her 

Arms, 299 ; Badge, 305 ; Crown, 318 ; 

Coins, 418. 
Annulet, 39 ; for Differencing, 196 ; in 

Modern Cadency, 206; Annulets 

blazoned as " fduz Boundlets," 196. 
Antelope, 51, 68. 

Antiquaries, Arms of the Society of, 365. 
Antlers, 77. 

Apothecaries Company, 370. 
Appaumde, 77. 

Aquitaine, 306. See Alianore. 
Archbishops, the, 91, 96; their Rank, 

Style, and Titles, 91,429; Arms, 169, 

357, 358. 
Arched Crown, 318. 
Archee Coronettde 313. 
Archiepiscopal Staff, 357. See Crozier. 
Architectural Heraldry, 372. 
Ardomo, Sir Thomas, 121, 267. 
Ardeme, Sir Peter, 197. 
Argent, 19, 91. 
Argyll, the Duke of, 46 ; his Arms, 462 ; 

Supporters, 280. 
Arm, 50. 304. 
Armagh, Archbishop of, 91 ; his Arms, 

358. 
Armed. 12, 40, 62, 77. 
" Armes Parlantcs," 92, 125. 
•' Armes pour Enquirer," 465. 
Annourers* Company, 370. 



Armoury, 91. 

Armoyee, 77, 463. 

Arms, Heraldic, 91; of Archbisho|^ 
357; of Bishop^ 358; of Colleges, 
360 ; of Compuiies and Giiilda, 367 : 
Corporate, 145 : of Deans and Chap- 
ters, 359; of Dominion, 91, 294; of 
Heir, 137 ; of Heiress and Co-Hoireas, 
140; of Son of Heiress, 140; of 
Dauf^hter of Heiress, 143 ; of Heralds* 
College, 364; of Husband and Wife, 
139 ; of Kings of Anna, 365 ; of Lyon 
Office, 365; of Monasteries, 360; of 
Municipal and other Corporatioiis, 
365; of Peeress in her own right. 
169; officers' Daughters, 144; of 
Public Institutions, 365 ; of Public 
Schools, 364 ; of Prince and Princess 
of Wales, 322; Royal, 295; of Royal 
Consorts, 306; of unmarried Ladies, 
145; of Widowers, 144: of Widows. 
145. 

Arms "brought in," 141 ; Compoanding, 
153 ; Dimidiating,146 : Iiiip.iling, 139 ; 
Inheritance of, 135, 137; Marslmlling. 
136, 138 ; Official, 144 ; permanent 
Combination of, 140 ; Property in, 
136 ; Quartering, 156, 157 ; tempoFary 
Combination of, 138. 

Arms, Shields o^ "for Peace." 236, 257, 
388 ; " for War." 236, 256, 388. 

" Arms found." 443. 

••Arms," assumed, 443. 

Arms of Knights of Orden, Marshalling 
of; 168, 468. 

Arragon, Arms of, 308. 451. 

Arragon, Catherine of ; her Badges, 305 ; 
Quartered Arms, 308 ; Supporters, 309. 

Arrondie, 77. 

Arrow, 40 ; Arrows, Sheaf o^ 40, 261. 

Art, Heraldic, 448. 

Arthur, H.R.H., The Prince, 252, 331. 

Arthur Tudor, 40, 59, 260; his Arms, 
325; Badges, 72; Seal, 414; Moon- 
ment at Worcester, 75, 386. 

Arthur, Robert, 486. 

Artois, Blanche d\ 235. 

Artois, Comte d*, 470. 

Arundel, Monuments of the Fitz-AJans 
at, 132, 339. 

Arundel, The Fitz-Alans, Earls and 
Countesses of; Crest, 67: Coronets, 
105. See Fitz-Alnn. 

Arundel, Edmund d , 271, 409. 418. 

Arundel, John, Earl of; his Seal, 415. 

Arundel. Ralph d\ 437. 

Arundel, Richard, Earl of ; his Seal, 26$. 

Arundel, Thomas, Archbishop oi Canter- 
bury, 217; his Seal, 409. 

Arundel, Hie Baron : Arms, 65. 

Ascania, Bemhard, Count of, 415. 



INDEX. 



509 



AshehniBte, Sir Adam, 202. 

Ashton, Bebus of, 54, 123. 

Aflh-tree. 123. 

Ashwellthorpe, 267. 336. 

Assyrian Sculptures. 67. 

Asteley, Thomas, 225. 

Astley : Arms, 460 ; Badge, 262. 

Astley, Baron Hastings, 229. 

Acton, interesting Effigies at» 339. 

At Gaze. 62, 82. 

At Speed, 62. 

Atliol, tlie Duke of; 56. 

Attainder, 92. 

Aubeny, D* : Arms, 214. See Daubeny, 
D'Aubigne. 

Audele, Sir Hugh, 224. 

Audcle, Sir James, 224. 

Augmentation of Honour, 78, 93, 143, 
433 : Difference by, 229, 434 ; " of 
Merit," 433; "of mere Grace," 433; 
early Examples of, 433; granted by 
Richard, II., 126, 434 ; granted by 
Henry VIII., 309, 310, 434 ; true and 
truly " honourable,*' 443 ; Scottish, 
435 ; of Foreign Heraldry. 470. 

Augmented, 78. 

Augusta, The Princess, 251. 

Aumberdene, Nicholas, 66. 

Austria Proper, Arms of, 471. 

Austria, The Empire of: Arms, 471; 
Supporters, 471 ; Crown, 471 ; Im- 
perial Eagle, 471 ; Imperial Standard, 
472 ; National Flag*!, 472. 

Austria, Francis, Emperor of, K.G. ; hiB 
Garter-Plate, 471. 

Aveline de Fortibus, Countess of Lan- 
caster, 198, 385. 

Avenel, William d', 196. 

Avetmes, Alice d' ; her Seal, 150. 

Axe, 40. 

Aylesbury. John d', 225. 

Aylesbury, Thomas d', 225. 

Azure, 93. 

Bacinet, Basinet, 95, 102. 

Bacon : Arms, 212. 

Bacoun, Sir Edm. de, 184. 

Baden : Arms, 474 ; Supporters, 474. 

Badges, 93, 254, 394; mentioned bv 
SbEikespeare, 255; nuushalled with 
Achievements of Arms, 171 ; Differ- 
enced, 199, 256, 411 ; two Classes o^ 
255 ; Series oC 261 ; Boyal, of Eng- 
land, 74, 75, 303, 306, 332, 378 ; of 
Ostrich Feathers, 72, 256, 323 ; Swan, 
260; White Hart, 263, 454 ; Ears of 
Wheat, 453; of Scotland, 132, 305; 
of Ireland, 45, 128, 305; of Princi- 
pality of Wales, 332; of Fitz-Alans, 
339 ; of Nevilles, 339 ; on Monuments, 
394 ; in modem Heraldry, 441. 



Badge, or Jewel, of Knights of the 
Order of the Garter, 341 ; of Offi- 
cers of the Order of the Garter, 343 ; 
of the Order of the Thistle, 345; of 
the Order of St. Piitrick, 346 ; of the 
Order of the Bath, 349 ; of the Order 
of St. Michael and St. George, 351 ; 
of the Order of the Star of India, 352 ; 
of the Legion of Honour of France, 
354 ; of the Order of the Medjidie of 
Turkey, 354; of the Orders of the 
Danuebrog and the White Elephant 
of Denmark, 355, 356 ; of Ulster, 56, 
94 ; of Nova Scotia, 95. 
Badlesmere, Bartholemew de, 213. 
Boginton, 336. 
Bagot : Arms, 460. 

Bagot. Sir WUliam and Lady, 204, 336. 
Bagot, John. 187. 
Ball, 40. 

Balliol : Arms, 181. 
Balliol. Eustace, 210. 
BaUiol, Hugh de, 210. 
Balliol, John de, 210. 
Balliol, Richard de, 215. 
Balliol College, Oxford, 360. 
Balsam, Brass at, 160, 387. 
Bangor : Arms of the See, 358. 
Banded, 78. 

Banner, 40, 93, 287; at Sea, 288; on 

Seals, 410; at Caerlaverock, 288, 485. 

Banneret, Knight Banneret, 93, 287; 

at Caerlaverock, 487. 
Bannerman, Sir iL, 40. 
Bar, 22, 40. 

Barbarossa, The Emperor, 315. 
Barbed, 66. 126, 
Barded, 78 ; Bardings, 78. 
Bardolf, Eliz., Lady, her Seal, 406, 407. 
Bardolf, John, Lord, his Seal, 406. 
Bardolf; John, 176. 
Bardolf, Thomas, 176, 181. 
Bardolf, William, 176, 181. 
Baret, John, his Monogram and Collar 

of SS., 337, 492. 
Barington, Sir Philip de, 201. 
Barkcle, Morris de, 183. 
Barley-Garbe, 74. 
Barlow, Sir M., 66. 
Barnacles, 40. 
Baron, 94. 

Barons, their Style and Coronets, 94. 
Baronets, their Order, Rank and Badges, 

56,94. 
Barre, De, Arms of, 125, 148, 308, 405. 
Barre, De^ Henry, 151. 
Barre, De Joan, her Seal, 405. 
Barrington, Sir M., 100. 
Bars Gemelles, 22, 40 ; for Differencing, 

207 ; Examples of, 213. 
Barml^, Bamly, Btif\4e, 36, 78. 



510 



INDEX. 



Barrnlet. 22, 40. 

Bany. 35, 78. 

Barry Bendy, 36, 78. 

Bor-wue, 36, 78. 

Bascreyille. Walter de. 105. 

Boscrevillc, William de, 11&gt;5. 

Base, 16 

Boainet, Bacinct, 95, 102. 

Bossett. the Brothers, 184. 

Ba88(»tt. Sir John, 209. 

BosBctt, Rnlph, Loid, 109. 208, 273 ; his 
Hehn, 269. 455. 

Bassott, Rauf. 208. 

Bassctt, Richard de, 215. 

Baasott. Sir Rymon do. 208. 

Bassett, William, 194. 

Bat, 454, 

Bath Herald, 95, 111. 

Bath, Order of the; instituted, re- 
modelled, and in its present Consti- 
tution, 347; Knights Grand Gross, 
347 ; Knights Commantlers, 347 ; the 
earliest enrolled Knight, 347 ; Compa- 
nions, 348—350 ; Bwlgea. 349 ; Naval 
and Military Insignia, .H4S; Diplo- 
matic and Civil Insignia, 349 ; Motto, 
283, 350, and its first Occurrence, 347 ; 
Stall-Plates and Banners, 378. 

Bath and Wells, Arms of the See, 858. 

Baton. 40 ; Baton Sinister. 437. 

Battcring-Uara, 40. 

Battle-Axe, 310. 

"Battle of Spors," 435. 

Battled, 7a 

Battled. Embattled. 78. 

Baud, Sir Walter, 64. 

Baux, Francis de, 308. 

Bavaria ; Arms, Supporters and Motto, 
474. 

Bayeux Tapestry. 3. 

Beacon. 40. 

Beaked, 78. 

Bear and Ragged Staff, Badge. 68, 256. 

Bearers. 279. 

Bearing, Bearings, 95. 

Beatrice, H.B.H.. the Princess, 252. 311. 

Beatrice, of Portugal, her Seal, 480. 

Beauchmnps, their Differences, 179, 180, 
202. in the Rous Roll. 490; earlv 
Shields of, 179, 198; later Shields of. 
179; their Monuments. 179.256,387. 

Beauchamp, Guy. Earl of Warwick, 179. 

Beauchamp. Richard. K.G., Earl of 
Warwick, 104. 108. 167; his Effigy, 
344; Crest. 269; Seal, 278. 

Beauchamp, Richard. Bishop of Salis- 
bury, 342. 

Beauchamp, Sir John, K.G.. 179. 

Beauchamp, Thomas, K.G.. Earl of 
Warwick. 113. 389 ; liis fine Brass. 256. 

Beauchamp. Roger, 179. 



Beauchamp. Sir Giles, 179. 

Beauchamp, Sir Walter, 179. 

Beauchamp. Sir John de. 202. 

Beauchamp, Sir William. 179. 

Beauchamp, WUliam de, 162, 215. 

Beauchamp, Margaret, of BletiO, 249. 
392. 

Beauchamp, of Hache. 309. 

Beauchamp. Shield oC charged witli 
Martlets. 179, 187. 

Beauchamp Chapel, at Warwick. 17T&gt;, 
186. See Warwick. 

Beaufoits, their Cadency, 204, 248 ; their 
Legitimation, 248; Bodges, 50, 258. 
262; Crest, 199, 267; Label, 246. 

Beaufort, John, KG., Earl and Mar- 
quess of Somerset and Dorset, 24S ; 
his Arms before A.D. 1397, 437. 

Beaufort, Henry, Cardinal, 204, 248. 

Beaufort, Thomas, K.G., Duke of Exeter, 
&amp;c., 199, 248, 267; Seal as High 
Admiral, 412. 

Beaufort, John, K.G., Duke of Somerset. 
199, 248, 249; his Badge. 258: 
Monument, 344. 

Beaufort, Edmond. Second Duke of 
Somerset, 248. 

Beaufort, Edmond, Fourth Doke of 
Somerset, 249. 

Beaufort, Henry, Third Duke of Somer- 
set, 249. 

Beaufort, Joan, Queen of Scotland, her 
Lozenge of Arms, 415. 

Beaufort, Margaret, Countess of Rich- 
mond, 228. 249, 318, 319; her Monu- 
ment described, 391. 

Beaulbrt, Margaret de, 228. 

Beaufort, Fits-Boy Somerset, Duke of. 
36, 280. 

Beaumont, Lewis de. Bishop of Durham. 
218. 

Beaumont, John, K.G., 191 ; his Mant- 
ling, 116. 

Beaumont, Margaret de, 411. 

Beaumonte, Sir John, 191. 

Beaumonte, Sir Thomas, 101. 

Bee, AnUiony, Bishop of Durham. 218. 
459. 

Beche, Sir John do, 202. 

Beckfoid, Crest of, 269. 

Beddington, Brasses at, 67, 194. 

Bedford, John Plantagenct, K.G.. Duke 
of, &amp;c., 244, 266. 

Bcilford, Jaspar Tudor, K.G., Duke of. 
Earl of Bedford, 74, 249 ; his Seals, 
303 412 413. 

Bedford, Russell, Duke of, 63, 462. 

Bees, 66; of France, 470. 

Belgium, Arms of, 474; Supporterv. 
474 ; Standard and Ensign, 474. 

Belgium. Leopold, King of, K.G.. 250. 



INDEX. 



511 



Bell, 40; Belled, 78. 

Bend, 23, 40; for DiflTerencing, 207 ; 

Examples of, 210. 
Bendlet, 23, 40; for Differencing, 207; 

Examples of, 210, 
Bend-Sinister, 24, 40, 437. 
Bend-Wise, 23, 30, 78. 
Bendy, 36, 78. 
Bentinck, Arms of, 142. 
Bere. Richard de la, 272. 
Berengaria, of Navarro, The Queen, 306, 

383. 
Berenguer, of Spain : Anns, 469. 
Beresforde, B., 182. 
Berg, 313. 

Bergavenny. See Neville. 
Bergedorft, 468. 

Berkeleys, their Arms, 75, 183 ; Differ- 
ences, 175, 193 ; Balge. 68 ; Crest, 47. 
Berkel(*y, Maurice ile, 223. 
Berkeley, Thomas, Lonl, 68, 335. 
Bemadutte, Arms of, 478. 
Berners, John, Lord, K.G., 226. 
Bcmera, The Lady Margery, 226. 
Berries, 76. 
Berrington, Mr. ; his lithograph of the 

De Valence Shield, 486. 
Berri, Due de, 470. 
Bertie, Motto of, 283. 
Berwick, The Baron, 68. 
Beulee, Richard de, 104. 
Beverley Minster, 38, 48; EflBgy of 
Priest at, 383 ; Percy Shrine at, 382, 
383 ; Lions at, 450. 
Bezant, 25, 40 ; Bezantde, Bezanty, 78. 
Bible, The Holy, borne as a Charge, 362. 
Biggleswade, Brass at, 394. 
Bigod, Earl of Norfolk : Anns, 458. 
Bi^ot, De : Arms, 192. 
Billet, 33, 40 ; for Differencing, 194. 
Billettee, Billetty, 33, 78. 
Bird-Bolt, 40, 

Birds, Heraldic, 63 ; of Prey, 64. 
Bishops, their Style, Rank, and Arms, 
95, 96, 169 ; their Sees and Aims, 357, 
358, 359. 
Bbhops of London, Durham, and Win- 
cheater, 95, 119. 
Bisiie, or Snake, 66. 

Black Prince, Edward Plantagenet, 
K.G., The; the first Prince of Wales, 
by Creation, 236, 237 ; Earl of Ches- 
ter and Duke of Cornwall, 236 ; his 
Arms, 70, 239; Shields "of War," 
and " of Peace," 236, 256 ; Sij^nature, 
398; Badge, 256; Crest, 114. 266; 
Label, 236 ; Basinet, Helm and Coro- 
net, 109, 269, 455 ; Pommel of Sword- 
Hilt, 448, 451 ; Will. 236; Gauntlets, 
44; Monument, 385, 888; Effigy. 
102, 113, 343. 



Black Prince, his Wife, 236. 

Blackwood, 74. 

Blanckenbcrg, 313. 

Blayney, The Baron, 63. 

Blazon, Blazoning, 8, 96. 

Blickling, Brasses at, 67. 

Blondeville, Ranulph, Earl of Lincoln 

and Chester, 403. 
Blonde, William le, 197. 
Blount : Arms, 459, 460. 
Blount, Sir Thomas, 187. 
Blue-Mantle, Pursuivant, 111. See 

Herald. 
Boar's-Head, 125. 
Bohemia : Arms, 259, 307. 
Bohemia, Anne of. iSee Anne. 
Bohemia, John, King of, 2.')7, 465. 
Bohun, De : Arms, 61 ; Differences, 205 ; 
Badge, 65, 254,258, 261 ; Shields and 
Seals, 154, 186, 409. 
Bohun, Alianore de. Duchess of Glou- 
cester, 241 ; her Brass, 43, 155, 162, 
385, 449 ; fully described, 389. 
Bohun, Humphrey de, the first of that 

name, 154. 
Bohun, Henry de, First Earl of Hereford, 

154. 
Bohun, Humphrey de. Third Earl of 
Hereford ; his Seal and Secretum, 151 , 
412 ; Crest, 266 ; Supporter, 277 ; In- 
ventory, 127, 160. 
Bohun, Humphrev de, K.G , last Earl of 

Herefonl; his Stall-Plate, 116, 186. 
Bohun, William de, K.G., Earl of Nor- 
thampton, 186, 409. 
Bohun, Margaret de, 227. 
Bohun, ^lary de, 164. 
Bohun, Edward de, 265. 
Bohun, John de, 151. 
Bois, Sir Roger de and Lady, .335. 
Boleyn, Anne, The Queen, 309. 
Boleyn, Sir Thomas, K.G., Earl of Wilt- 
shire and Ormonde, 105, 108, 344. 
Bolingbroke. See Henry Plantagenet. 
Bologue ; Arms, 306. 
Bologne, Matilda of. The Queen. 306. 
Bolton, Rebus of, 54. 
Booth, 40, 360, 362. 
Border-Lines, 18. 

Bordure,33 ; fur Cuilency, 214, 241 ; for 
Difference, 207; impaled, 33, 163; 
quartered, 33, 144 ; Exampl*^ of, 214, 
248, 249; in the Arms of IVlatcs, 
217 ; of Englami, 242 ; of France, 242 ; 
in ScoUish Heraldry, 217. 
Bordured, Bordered, 78. 
Boroughbridge, Battle of, 160. 
Boston, Braas at, 75, 122. 
Boterols, 313. 
Bothe, Roger del, 339. 
Botiler, Boteler, John le, 43, 214. 



512 



INDEX. 



Botiler, Three Goats of, 460. 

Bottler, of Wem, 183. 

Boton^, Botony, Gobony, 40. 

Botonee Fitchde, 41. 

Bottreaux, William, Lord, 279, 411. 

Bottitcaux, Margaret, Lady of, 411. 

Boun, De, 71, 72. 

Boun, Franc de, 187, 193. 

Boun, Sir Gilbert le, 192. 

Bourcliier, Henry, K.G., Earl of Essex 

and Eu, 226, .S39, 344; his Mantling, 

115: Crest, 270; Label, 226 ; Brass, 

386. 394. 
Bourchier, Sir Humphrey, 285; his 

Monument, 394. 
Bourchier, John, K.G., Lord Bemers: 

Mantling, 115. 
Bourchier, Ludoyic Robsart,K.G., Lord, 

44; Arms. 54, 226, his Crest, 270; 

Monument, 271, 394. 
Bourchier, William, Lord Fitz-Waryn, 

226. 
Bourchier-Knot, 284, 285, 394. 
Bourdon, 41. 
Bourdon, John, 48. 
Bouton, M. Victor; his "Treatise on 

Heitddry," 163, 470. 
Bowed, 17. 
Bowen-Enot, 284. 
Bowers Gifford, Brass at, 190. 
Boyne, The Viscount, 68. 
Boys, Edw. de. 208. 
Boys, Sir Robert de. 454. 
Boyton, Effigy of Croased-legged Knight 

at, 225. 
Brabazon. Sir Roger, 187. 
Braced. Brazed, 78. 
Bradston : Arms, 167. 
Bradston. Sir Tliomas, 202. 
Braganza, Catherine of. The Queen, 311. 
Brandenburgh Anspach. 312. 
Brandon : Arms, 460 ; Badge, 262. 
Brandsburton. Brasses at. 214. 
Branspeth, Effigies at, 339. 
Braose. See Brewys. 
Braybroke. the Baron. 58, 460. 
Braye, the Baroness. 60. 
Brazen-Nose College, Oxford: Arms, 

361. 
Brehna. or Engem, 313. 
Brett, Sir Amyas, 213. 
Brettep^e. 78. 
Brewers' Company, 373. 
Brewys De, or De Braose, Sir Giles, 

175, 201. 
Brewys, Sir John, 176, 269 ; Crest, 269. 
Brewys, John, 176. 
Brewys, Piers, 181. 
Brewys, Richard, 175. 
Brewys, Sir Thomas, 410. 
Brewys, Sir William, 175 ; Seal, 409. 



Brewys, William, 181. 

Breya, 41. 

Bridport, The Baron, 65. 

Brisee, 466. 

Bristol Cathedral, 54, 183. 

Bristol : Arms of Ciiy, 366. 

Bristol : Arms of See, 359. 

Bristol, Merchants Adventuiers, of, 368. 

Brisure, Brizure, 41, 466. 

Britannia, 27. 

Britchebuiy, Avery, 210. 

Brittany, John, Count of, 34, 208. 

Brittany, Canton of. 34, 154; Label of. 

239. 
** Brochant sur le tout,'* 465. 
Brodsorg, Dife,'467. 
Broke, Robert, Loitl, 205. 
Bromflete, Sir Thomas, 191 ; his Helm, 

269. 
Bromsgrove, 264, 269, 336. 
Brotherton, Thomas de : Arms, 112, 153, 

235, 410. 
Brotherton, Edward de, 410. 
Brotherton, Margaret de, 153. 
"Brought in," 14L 
Brownlow, The Earl, 49, 58. 
Broxbonme, Brass a^ 132. 
Bruce, Robert the, 56; his Motto, 283; 

EarlofCarrick, 330. 
Bruckhausen, 313. 

Brunswick : Arms, 312, 474 ; Sup- 
porters, 475. 
Brunswick, Caroline ot The Queen, 

312. 
Brunswick, Charles William, Duke oC 

312. 
Brus, Robert le, 212. 
Bryan, Bryenne. Sir William de, 46, 269 ; 

his Crest 209. 
Bryan, Sir Guy de ; his Crest, 269. 
Bryan, Elizal^lh de, 227. 
Buchanan : Badge, 268. 
Buch, The Captal de, K.G., 228, 229. 
Buckingham, Thomas Plantagenet, 

Duke of. See Thomas Plantagenet 
Buckingham, Alianore, Duchess of. Set 

Bohun, Alianore de. 
Buckingham, The Dukes of, cf the 15th 

Century. See Stafford. 
Buckingham, Badge of; 262. 
Buckuigham. Chandoa Grenville Nu- 
gent Temple, Duke of; his Crest, 

273 ; Supportere, 280. 
Buckingham Palace, Royal Henldiy 

at, 375. 
Buckle, 41 ; of Pelham, 262. 434. 
Buffalo's-Head, 312. 
Bulmer, Rauf de, 194. 
Bunbuiy, Effigy at, 265. 
Buoy of a Ship, 262. 
Burdett, John, 187. 



INDEX. 



613 



Bnigh, Hubert de. Earl of Kent, 197. 

Burgh, John de. Earl of Ulater : Arms, 
166 239 247 

Burgh, Elizabeth de,her Seal, 151, 238. 

Burghersh Monuments in Lincoln Ca- 
thedral, 162, 222, 237, 240, 296, 387. 

Burgonet, 41. 

Burgundy : Arms of Dukes, 471. 

Burgundy, Charles " the Bold," Duke 
of, 355. 

Burgundy, Anne of, 244. 

Burgundy, Philip of, 244. 

Burke, Sir Bernard, his Peerage, 121. 

Burnet, Brass at, 366. 

Bumhamthorpe, 394. 

Burton, Rebus of, 54 : Sir Thomas, 336. 

Burwash : Arms, 459. 

Buiy St Edmunds, Church of St Mary 
at, 337. 

Bury, Elizabeth de, 407. 

Butler : Arms, 139, 309. 

Butterflies, 66. 

Byllynge, Nichol, 216. 

Byron, The Baron : Arms, 77» 81, 224. 

Caboased, 63, 78. 

Cadency, Definition of, 96, 173, 178; 
various Forms of, 177; Early Usage, 
174 ; Single Marks, 200, 204 ; Modem 
Usage of, 206 ; in Modem Heraldry, 
441; Royal, 206, 251, 253; of Plan- 
tagenets, 231, 234. ; of Hollands, 247 ; 
of Beauforts, 248 ; of Tudors, 249 ; of 
Nevilles, 203 ; not aiSwted by Quar- 
tering, 144. 

Cadet, 96, 137. 

Calthorpe, Sir William, 394. 

Caltrap, 41. 

Calveley, Sir Hugh, 134 ; his Ciest, 264. 

Camail, 107. 

Cambridge : Arms of University, 362. 

Cambridge, Edmond Plantagenet, "of 
Lan^ley,*' K.G., Earl of, 241. 

Cambridge, Richard Plantagenet, "of 
Coningsbur^h," K.6., Earlof, 243. 

Cambridge, Richard Plantagenet, Earl 
of, 245. 

Cambridge, Adolphns Frederick, K.O., 
Duke oC 251. 

Cambridge, Gtoorge William Frederick 
Charles, K.O., Duke of, 331. 

Cambridge, H. R. H., The Princess Mary 
of, 331. 

Cambridge, Label of, 252. 

Camden, William, Clarenoieax King of 
Arms, 100. 

Camden, The Marquess, 63. 

Cameron : Badge, 263 ; Crest, 273. 

Camoys, Lord, K.O., 107, 336, 344, 483. 

Camoys, Margaret de, 52, 227. 

Camoys, Raufde, 195. 



Campbell : Arms, 141; Badge, 263. 

CampbeU, Duke of ArgyU, 462. 

Campden, John de, 395. 

Canning, The Earl, 56. 

Cantelo, William de, 192. 

Cantelupe, William, de, 63, 192. 

Canterbury : Arms of the See, 96, 357. 

CanterbuiT Cathedral, Monument of tlie 
Black Prince in, 385, 388 ; Monu- 
ment of Henry IV. in, 337 : Cloisters, 
43, 52, 149, 180, 218, 377, 410 ; Stained 
Glass in, 44. 

Canterbury: Arms of the Deanery, 360. 

Canterbury : Arms of the City, 366. 

Canting Heraldry, 96, 124. 

Canton, 31 ; Use in Marshalling, 143; 
for Differencing, 207; Examples of, 
208 ; of Paternal Arms, 143 ; with a 
Bordure, 33. 

Cantoned, 79. 

Carbuncle, Escarbunde, 41. 

Cardigan, The Earl of, 45, 207. 

Cardinal's Hat, 96. 

Oarew : Arms, 57, 459. 

Carew, Piers de, 214. 

Carlaverock, Karlaverock, Caerlaverock, 
RoU of, 237, 288 ; New Version of, 487 ; 
Siege of, 154 ; Banners and Bannerets 
at, 288, 487. 

Carlisle ; Arms of the See, 358. 

Carlisle, The Earl of, 207. 

Carnegie, William, Earl of Xorthesk, 
436. . 

Caroline, of BrunswicAThe Queen, 312. 

Caroline \l^lhehnina. The Queen, 312. 

Carpenters* Company, 370. 

Carrick, Feudal Earldom of, 324, 330. 

Carrick, The Brace, Earl of, 380. 

Carrick, Duncan, Earl of, 330. 

Carrick, John, Earl of, 330. 

Carrick, Albert Edward, Prince of Wales, 
Earl of, 322, 324, 330, 331. 

Oar-Standard, 237. 

Carysfort, The Earl of, 57. 

Casket, Heraldic, at Goodrich Court, 147. 

Oassuben : Arms, 312. 

Castile and Leon, Alianore of. See 
Alianore. 

Castile and Leon, Constance of, 239. 

Castile and Leon, Ferdinand III., King 
of, 157. 

Castile and Leon, Isabella of; 241, 243. 

Castile and Leon, John "of Ghent,'* 
Kingof;239,402. 

Castile and Leon : Aims, 42, 306 ; Quar- 
tered Shield of, 157 ; Label, 243, 246 ; 
Bordure, 243, 480 ; Tincture of the 
Lion of Leon, 490. 

Casde, 42; of CastUe, 400. 

Castle Acre Priory, 38 ; Arms, 360. 

Oat«-Monntain, 62. 

2 L 



514 



INDEI. 



OatliedralB, Heraldry of the» 877. 
Ofttherine of Arragon, The Queen, 308 ; 

BodmSOS. 
Oathenne of Bragann, The Queen, 81 1. 
Catherine of France, The Queen, 307. 
Oatherine Howard, The Queen, 310. 
OatberioeParr.Tbe Queen, 310; Badges, 

305. 
Catherine Plantagenet, 216. 
Catherine Swyneford, 337; Monument 

in Lincoln Cathedral, 385, 394. 
Catherine Hall, Cambridge, 363. 
Catherine-Wheel, 271. 
Canteville, De, 196. 
Cavendish ; Aims, 62 ; Motto, 28i. 
Oeca,207,210, 
Centaur, 67. 
Ceroel6e, 79. 
Ceri8e,51. See Seruae. 
Chains in the Arms of Navarre, 486. 
Chamberlain, The Hereditary, of the 

German Empire, 473. 
Chamfron, 42. 

Chamnagne : Arms, 158, 170. 
ChandoB, Sir Robert de, 37. 
Chandos, Edward de, 224. 
ChandoB Arms, 183. 
Chapean of Estate, 114. 
Chaplet, 42 ; of Roses, 75, 194. 
Charae, Charges, 8 ; Charged, 79. 
Chartes I., as Prince of Wales, 250; 

Arms, 298; Supporters, 303; Crown, 

818; Badges, 305; his Grant to 

Baronets, 95. 
Charles II., as Prince of Wales. 25Q; 

Arms, 298; Supporters, 303; Crown, 

818; Budges, 305; his Grants to 

Barons, 94; Arms of his Natural 

Sons, 438. 
Charles II., King of Navarre, 166. 
Charles V., of France, 73. 
Charles " the Bold,'* of Burgundy, 355. 
Charles William, of Brunswick, 312. 
Charlotte, of Mecklenburgh-Strelitz,The 

Queen, 312. 
Charlotte Augusta, Princess of Wales, 

250. 
Charlotte Augusta MatUda, 251. 
Charlton, Cherlton, Edward Baton, of 

Powys, 114, 389. 
Charlton : Arms, 460. 
Chartliam, Brasses at, 43, 131, 486. 
CbastUon, The Viscount, 229. 
Chastilon, Mary de, 362. 
Chaucer, Geoffirey, 461. 
Chauss^, 79. 
Chaworths: Arms, 189. 
Chaworth, Sir Patrick, 189. 
Checkenden, 183. 
Cheeky, Cheau^, 36, 79. 
Cheshirp. Nobility and (Jentry of, 74. 



Chess-Book. 42; ChesB-Kuight, He- 
raldic, 14&amp; 

Chester, the Earls of, 70, 74; Edward 
m., as Earl of, 234; Albert Edward, 
Prince of Wales, Earl of, 322, S23. 

Chester: Arms, 393, 459. 

Chester : Arms of the See, 358. 

Chester : Arms of the City, 149. 

Chester Herald, 111. 

Cheeter-le-Street, Effigy at, 211. 

Chevalier, as a Charge, 311. 

Chevron, 24, 42; for Differencing, 207; 
Examples of, 213. 

ChevTonel, 24, 42 ; for Diflbrencing, 207. 

Cheyne, Thomas, 193. 

Cheyne, Rau£f;21&amp; 

Cheney, Sir John, K.6., 338. 

Chichester : Arms of the See, 55, 35$. 

Chief, 16, 22, 42 ; for Differencing, 207 ; 
Examples of, 212. 

Chigni, of Savoy : Arms, 469. 

Chigwell, Brass at, 120. 

Childrey, Brass at, 204. 

Chipping Camden, Brass at, 118. 

Cholmondeley, The Marquess, 45. 

Cholmondeley : Motto, 28a 

Christ College, Cambridf^e : Arms, 963. 

Christchuroh Cathedral, Oxford, 227, 260. 

ChrtstchurchCoUege,Oxford : Arm8,361. 

Christohurch, Hampshire, 382. 

Chrishall, Brass at, 180. 

ChristiemXL,Kine of Sweden JC G.,478. 

Christiern, Duke ofBrunswick,K.G^474. 

Churchill, John, E.G., Duke of Marl- 
borough, 435, 462. 

Cinquefoil, 42, 71. 

Cinque Ports: Arms, 149; Seals, 413. 

Civic Grown, 42. 

Clare, De, Ancient Device oC 238 : Arms, 
21.24; Seal, 146; Badgp, 42: dimi- 
diating Fitzgerald, 147: dimidiated 
by C^wall, 146; and impaled by 
ComwaU, 147. 234. 

Clare, Earl Richard de, 147, 234. 

Chue, WUliam de, 223. 

Clare, Sir Thomas de, 147. 

Claie, Elizabeth de, 362 ; her Seal, 406. 

Clare, Margaret de, 146. 

dare. Differenced Shield oC 191. 

dare Hall, Cambridge, 362. 

Claremonte Nesle, 148. 

darenoe, George Plantagenet, E.G., 
Duke of; 246 ; his Crest, 266. 

Clarence, Lionel, KX&gt;., Duke of, 237. 

darence, Thomas Plantagenet, K.G.. 
Duke of, 243. 

Cluence, William Henry, Duke of, after- 
wards King William lY., 251. 

Clarence, Sir John de, 437. 

Clarencienx, King of Arms, 96, 111; 
Arms, 365. 



INDEX. 



515 



Clarendon, Sir Roger de, 437. 

Clarioorde, Glayiooide, 42. 

Clarion, 42. 

Clarke, Sir John, 435. 

Clasps, 352. 

Classic Architecture, Non-Heraldic, 373. 

Clavering, Sir Allan, 212. 

Clavering, John, 225. 

Clayton and Bell, 376. 

Clehongie, Effigy at, 212, 379, 451. 

Clenched, 71. 

Clettenburgb, 313. 

Cleveland, The Duke of; 67, 438. 

Cleves, Anne oC The Queen, 309. 

Cleyes : Anns, 313. 

Clifford: Arms, 180; Motto, 283. 

Clinton, John de, 213, 407. 

Clinton, John, Lord, 408. 

Clinton, Thomas, 184, 224. 

Clinton, William, Earl of Hontingdon: 
Seal, 407. 

Clinton: Badge, 262. 

Clogher, Seeo^ 55. 

Clopton: Arms, 211. 

Clothworkers' Company and Hall, 369. 

Close. 79. 

Cloeet, 22, 42. 

Cloufe, 53, 79. 

Clovis, 73, 

Clyflon, Nyool de, 193. 

Clynton, William, Earl of Huntingdon, 
183. 

Coats of Anns, 4, 96 ; to be distinguished 
from Badges, 440. 

Cobham, Fimuly of, 60, 180; their 
Brasses at Cobham, inEent« 127, 180, 
195 ; Badge, 262. 

Cobham, Eleanor de. Duchess of Gbu- 
cester, 245. 

Cobham, Henry de, 189. 

Cobham, Sir John de, 180. 

Cobham, Rauf de, 180. 

Cobham, Sir Beginald de, 180. 

Cobham, Thomas de, 180. 

Cockatrice, 67. 

Cogsale, William, 192. 

Coif of Mail, 109. 

Coins, Heraldry of, 97, 416 ; Ancient, of 
Sidly, 487; Modem, of E^land, 418. 

Coker : Arms, 309. 

Colchester, The Baron, 76. 

Colesbill, Cross-legged Effigy at, 338. 

Collar, 97, 835; MarshaUed, 168, 171 ; 
of Mennaids, 68, 335 ; of the Order 
of the Garter, 341, 342; Lancastrian 
of SS., 112, 128, 335 ; under Heniy 
VII., 338; under Henry Vni., 338; 
present Use of, 838 ; various Pendants 
worn with, 338; Torkist, of Suns and 
Boees, 108, 338, 339; Pendants worn 
with, 339; of the Order of the Thistle, 



345; of the Order of St. Patrick, 846; 
of the Order of the Bath, 348; of the 
Order of St. Michael and Si George, 
350 ; of the Order of the Star of 
India, 352; of Foreign Orders of 
Knighthood, 355, 468. 

College of Arms, 91, 111 ; Aims, 364 ; 
Crest, 364. 

Colleges of Oxford, their Arms, 360 ; of 
Cambridge, their Arms, 362; Eton, 
364. 

CoUey : Arms, 461. 

Colomb, 65. 

Colour, Colouring, Heraldic, 448. 

Colours, 16, 97. 

Column, 313. 

ColwaU, Brass at, 210. 

Comb, 42. 

Combatant, 79. 

Combinations, Heraldic : Temporary, 
138; Permanent, 140. 

Conmionwealth, Great Seal of, 402. 

Companions of the Order of the Bath, 
348, 350. 

Compartment, 448. 

Compon^ Compony, Gobony, 36, 79. 

Compounding Arms, Compounded Arms, 
79, 97. 153. 

Compound Quartering, Early Examples 
of, 159. 

Compton: Badge, 40, 262. 

Comyn, Sir John, 182. 

Confessor, Edward the; or. Saint 
Edward: Arms, 29, 65, 126, 390; 
Origin of the Martlets of his Shield, 
186; Shields in Westminster Abbey 
and Hall, 126, 378; his Arms impaled 
by Richard II., 126, 288, 296; quar- 
tered by Edward IV., 297 ; granted to 
Thomas and John Holland and to 
Thomas Mowbray, 126 ; assumed by 
Henry Bolingbroke, 127, 164; as- 
sumed, A. D. 1546, by the Di^e of 
Norfolk, 127. 

Ooningsburgh, Richard Plantagenet, ot 
243, 245. 

Conjoined, 79 ; Conjoined in Lure, 79. 

Constable of England, 155. 

Constance, of Castile and Leon, 164, 239. 

Constance Cathedral, 107. 

Contoise, 98, 116, 267. 

Contoum^e, 79. 

Conventionalisms in Heraldio Drawing, 
450. 

Conyngham, The Marquess, 51. 

Coopers' Company, 370. 

Corbet, Rebus o^ 125. 

Oorder, Sir Galyon, 213. 

Cork, See of, 52. 

Cormorant, 65. 

Cdniah Chough, 65. 

2 l2 



516 



INDEX. 



Oornwttll: Anns, 823, S93. 

Cornwall: Richard, Earl o£, and Em- 
peror. 38, 214, 284. 

Cornwall, Edmond, second Earl of, 234 ; 
hifl Single Supporter, 234, 277. 

Cornwall, •* JohnofEltbam," E^l of,235. 

Cornwall, Edward, K.G., Duke of; 108, 
286. 

Cornwall, Sir Jolrn de^ K.G., Lord Fan- 
hope, 216, 234. 

Cornwall, Piers de Gayeston, Earl of, 581 . 

Cornwall, Albert Edward, Prince of 
Wales, Duke of, 322, 824, 880. 

Cornwall, impaling Clare, 147. 

Coronets, 97, 171 ; of Princes and Prin- 
cesses, 822; of the late Prince Con- 
sort, 821 ; of the Prince and Princess 
of Wales, 821; Foreign, 480; of 
Dauphin, 470; English, are not 
jewelled, 488. 

Corporate Bodies : Aims, 145, 357, 365 ; 
Crests. 266. 

Corpus Christ! College, Oxford, 361. 

Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, 862. 

Cosyngton, William, de, 194. 

Cortises, 23, 52 ; for Differencing, 207. 

Cotised, 22, 79, 207. 

Couci, De ; Anns, 459. 

Couohant, 79. 

Coucli^, 16, 79. 

Coudi^, 285. 

Count, Compte, Comes, 98, 480. 

Counter, 79. 

Counter-changing, CounteiHshaiiged, 86, 
39. 

Counter-charging, 466, 467. 

Connter-componce, 86, 79. 

Counter-embattled, 79. 

Counter-embowed, 79. 

Counter-fleurie, 80. 

Counter-indented, 811. 

Counter-passant, 80. 

Counter-potent, 20, 80. 

Counter-rampant, 58. 

Counter-salient, 80. 

Counter-seals, 398. 

Counter-tripping, 88. 

Counter-Tair, 20. 

Counties : Anns, 870. 

Countess, 98. 

Couped, 80, 81, 465. 

Courant, 80. 

Court of Chivalry, 186. 

Courtenay: Label, and original Arms, 
144; Anns, 195, 207; Labels, 220, 
228 ; Bordure, 216. 

Courtenay, William, Archbishop of Can- 
terbury, 217, 227. 

Courtenay, Sir Edward, 227. 

Courtenay, Edward de, Earl of Devon, 
216, 227. 



Courtenay, Hugh, Earl of Devon, 227. 

Courtenay, Sir Hugh, 72, 227, 270; 
Mantling, 116. 

Courtenay, Hugh de, Earl of Devon, 195, 
226. 

Courtenay, Heniy de. Earl of Devon, 
216. 

Courtenay, John de, 226. 

Courtenay. Sir Peter, K.G., 64, 227. 

Courtenay, Sir Philm, 212, 227. 

Courtenay, Bobert de, 227. 

Courtenay, Thomas, Earl of Devon, 228 . 

Courtenay, Sir William, 216,227. 

Courthope, William, Esquire, Somerset 
Herald, 48a 

Couste. See Cotise. 

Covered Cup, 48. 

Covert, 80. 

Coward, Cowed, 80. 

CowaqeeJehanghier, of Bombay : Amn, 
Crest, Motto, 446, 447. 

Orampette, Crampett^ 42, 80. 

Crancelin, 42, 314. 

Cranfield, Lionel, Banm, 191. 

Cranley, Archbishop, 100, 120. 

Creke, John de, 197. 

Crenelles, Crenelle, 80. 

Crescent, 71. 

Crests. 4, -98, 109, 264 ; in Blanm, 171 ; 
as distinguished from Badges, 256; 
differenced, 199, 266 ; early Examples 
o^ 264 ; hereditary, 272 ; not boms 
by Ladies, 266; two or moro borne 
by the same Person, 278 ; Marshalling 
bv, 275; of Corporate Bodies, 266; 
Modem, 272. 

Crest, of Black Prince, 266; of Eoglani 
266, 331 ; of Scotland, 332, 415; cf 
Lneland, 382. 

Crest-Conmet. 98, 267, 490. 

Crest-Wreath, 98. 

Crested, 80. 

OreveooBur, De, 460. 

Crimean Medal, 853. 

Crined, 80. 

Cromwell, Oliver, the Protector : Aims, 
402. 

Cromwell, of Tateshall, 5a 

Crosby, Sir John, and Lady, 339. 

Cross, 28, 42. 

Cross, Heraldry of the, 26. 

Cross, Boton^ Botonde Fitoh^, 30; 
Crosslet, Crosslet Fitchde, 29; of 
eight Points. 28; Fleurettfe, 29; 
Fleurie, 29; Fourch^ 29; Moline, 
29; Patonce, 29; Pomm^ 29; Po- 
tent, Potent Fitch^ 30; Potent 
Quadrate, 80; Pointed, 28; Quad- 
rate, 28 ; Quarter-pierced, Quarterly- 
pierced, 29 ; Beceroel^ 29 ; Tvefi^ 
30; Urd^29. 



INDEX. 



517 



GroBBletB, fryoaritedifferenciDgOhangea, 
180. 

CrosBed-legged Effigies not Templars, 
334. 

GroBses, Deoorations of Honour, 352. 

Grozier, 42, 49, 100. 

Grouchback. See Edmond. 

Grown, of Great Britain, 99; as a 
Gharffe, 99 ; the Imperial, 315 ; His- 
torical Examples of, 315, 319 ; Arched, 
317; of H.M. the Queen, 320, 332 ; 
of Herald Kings, 112, 357. 

Grown, Heraldio^ fine' Examples of, 
bbizoned on a Shield at St. Albans, 
453. 

Grown, Antique, 100; Gelestial, 100; 
Eastern, Radiated, 100 ; Mnral, 99 ; 
Naval, 99; Vallary, 99. 

Grown, (Goin), of gold and Silver, 417, 

4ia 

Growns, Foreign, 99 ; of Austria, 471 ; 

of France, 471; Si Stephen's, of 

Hnngaty, 472 ; of Fmssia, 473. 
Groydon, 35a 

Grander Kings of Jemsalem, 8, 11. 
Gnisades, 3, 287. 
Gmsil^, Gmsilly, 29, 80. 
Crystal Palace, Collections of Gasts at 

the, 386; Gasts of early Shields of 

Saxony at tlie, 478. 
Gnmberland, Ernest Angnstns, Duke 

of, King of Hanover, 251. 
Gunningham, Earl of Glencaim, 280. 
Gup, GcVered Guj), 43. 
Gursetjee Furdoonjee Paruk, of Bombay : 

Arms, Grest, Motto, 446, 506. 
GuiBon, Soger, 204. 
Cushion, 48. 
€utte, John, 866. 
Qyclas, 131. 
Qypnis : Ar^u, 308. 

Dabricheoonrt, John de, 198. 

Dstcie: Badge, 562, 284. 

Dagger, 43. 

Dagworth, Sir Kicholas, 67, 180. 

DaUing, Sir W. W., 76. 

Dalmatic, 100. 

Dalmenhuist, 311. 

Dalrymple-Hay : Crests, 278. 

Dalton, Sir T., 182. 

Daiton, Xorroy: his Grant to Gains 

College, Cambridge, 363. 
Dampierre, Le Sieur de, 464. 
Dancette, Danse, Daunse, 18, 48, 160. 
Danoettde, 80. 
Daunebrog, Order and Insignia of, 335 ; 

Cross of 826, 835. 355, 475. 
D*Arcy, Daroy, Sir Amory, 182. 
D'Arpy, Sir John, 177. 
D'Arcy, Norman, 177, 193. 



D'Aicy. PhiKp, 176, 193. 

D'Arcy, Bobert, 177, 193. 

D*Arcy, Sir William, 182. 

D'Arcy, William, 177, 194. 

Damley, Heniy Stuart, Lord, 163, 386, 

393. 
Datchet, 369. 
Daubeny: Arms,' 344. 
Daubeny, John, 45, 224. 
D*Aubeny, Sir Giles, K.G., 185, 344. 
D'Aubernoun, Sir John, 122, 287) 486. 
D*Aubemoun, Sir John, the Tounger,131 . 
D'Aubign^ Elys, 185. 
D*Aubign6, Philip, 185. 
D'Aubignd, William, 185. 
D* Aubygn6, Sir John, 48 ; his Achieve- 
ment, 134, 185, 198 ; Mantling, 115 ; 

Greet, 48, 271. 
Daughters, their Arms, 137, 207. 
Daughters of Heiresses, 142, 143. 
Daughters of Peers, 144. 
Daughters of the Sovereisn, 92, 253. . 
Dauphin, The : Arms and Coronet, 470 
Dauphin^, Dau^ny, 470. 
Day, John, the Printer, 370. 
Deans and Chapters : Arms, 359. 
Debrutsed, 60, 80. 
Decked, 80. 
Decies^ The Baron, 66. 
Deoorations of Honour, 352. 
Decrescent, 12, 71. 
Degrees, 43. 
Decreed, Degraded, 80. 
Deincourts : Arms, 194. 
Delabere : Crest, 272. 
Dela Mere, Abbot Thomas, 38; his 

Mitre, 118, 126. 
DeU Wane. See Warre. 
Demembered, Dismembered, 80. 
Demi, 80. 

Demi-Lion-rampant, 59. 
Demi-Monk : Crest of Lord Stourton,269. 
Dene, Sir Johan de^ 485. 
Denmark Proper : Aims, 310, 325, 475 ; 

impaled by tlie Prince of Wales, 327. 
Denmark: Arms, (aj&gt;. 1581), 326; as 

borne by the iSincess of Wales, (a.d. 

1864), 326; Changes in, 326, 327, 

475; Supporters, 476; Cross, 326, 

475; Standard and Ensign, 476. 
Denmarit, H.R.H., Alexandra of. The 

Princess of Wales, 311, 322, 325, 326, 

475. 
Denmark, Anne of, Queen of James YI. 

and L, 251, 310, 475. 
Denmark, Christiem I., King of, 327, 

356. 
Denmark. Frederick IL, King of, K.G., 

810, 327; his Gaiter&gt;Plate, 326, 475. 
Denmark, Frederick VI., Kingo^ K.G., 

475. 



518 



UIDEX. 



Dezunark, George of, K.O., Gonaoii of 
Queea Anne : Arms. Sll, 327 ; 
Anna, and Label, 251 ; Gaiier-Plate. 
475, 

Denmark, Margaret oi. Queen of Soot- 
land : her Lozenge of Arms, 327. 

Derby, Henry Plantagenet " of Boling^ 
brake," Earl of, 242. See Henry IV. 

Derby, Thomas Stanley, Earl of, 164. 

Derby, Stanleys, Earls of; 273, 281. 

Descriptiye Terms, 77, 487. 

Despenoer, De Spencer, 82, 185, 192. 

Despencer, Alianore, 226. 

Despenoer, Sir Hngh le, 212. 

Despencer, Isabelle, 167. 

Despenoer, Henry le. Bishop of Norwich, 
218. 

Despenoer, Sir Philip le, 212. 

Despenoer, Philip le, 208. 

Developed, 80. 

Devereux : Arms, 195, 460. 

Deverose, John, 213. 

Devon, The Earls of, 216, 281. 

Devonshire, The Duke of, 281. 

Deyville, Johan de, 190. 

Deyville, John de, 190. 

Dexter, 16, 17. 

Diaper, Diapering, 37, 100, 456. 

Diapered, 80. 

Diephold : Aims, 313. 

Difference, Diiferencing, 100, 173; De- 
finition of, 173 ; by Change of Tino- 
ture8,174 ; various Foims and Methods 
of, 177 ; Early Differencing Charges, 
199; by Minor Charges, 177; by 
Single Small Charges, 200; Modern 
Dinerenoes, 206; Examples of early 
differenced Shields, 203 ; Accessories 
differenced, 198 ; Badges differenced, 
257, 411; Crests differenced, 199, 
266; by a Bendlet, 235, 408; by 
Augmentation, 434. 

Digby, The Baron, 74. 

Digswell, Brasses at, 125, 394. 

Dimidiation, Dimidiating, Dimidiated, 
81, 101, 146. 

Dimidiation, in Foreign Heialdiy, 467. 

Disclosed, 81. 

Displayed, 81. 

Disponed, Disposed, 81. 

Ditzmers: Arms, 311. 

Dividing Lines, 18. 

Dobell, of Sussex : Arms, 460. 

Dolphin, 66, 148, 470. 

Dominion, Arms of, 91, 294. 

Donoughmore, The Earl of, 67. 

Dorchester Church, 41. 

Dormant, 81. 

Dormer, The Baron, 60. 

Dorset, Thomas Beaufort, Earl of, 248. 

Dorset, John Beaufort, Duke of, 199. 



Doable Queae, 81. 

Double Tdte, 81. 

Doubling, 101. 

Douglas: Arms, 56; Changes in Arms, 

184; Badge, 262. 
Douglas, James, K.G., Earl Dooglaa, 

184; Crest, 69; Mantling, 116. 
Douglas, " The good Sir James," 56. 
Douglas, William, Lord, 184. 
Douglas, William, 1st Earl Douglas and 

Earl of Mar, 184 ; Seal, 415. 
Douglas, William, Earl of Angus, 184. 
Douglas, Margaret, Countess A Lennox, 

163, 386, 395. 
Douglas, Badge of, 262. 
Douglas-Hannlton, Duke of Hamilton: 

Crests, 274. 
Dovetail, Dovetailed, (Counte^fedg- 

ing,) 18, 81. 
Downmg College, Cambridge, 364. 
Dragon, 67; of the Saxons, 286 ; Badge 

of Wales, 332; Supporter of the Tudor 

Soverdgns, 302. 
Drake: Crest, 43, 274. 
Drapers* Company : Aims, 368. 
Drawing, Heraldic, 448 ; excellent Ex* 

amples of, in Monies " Heraldnr of 

Fidi," Seyton's "Scottish Heraldry," 

Laing*8 " Andent Scottish Seals," and 

Shirley's " Noble and Gentle Men of 

England," 456, 491. 
Dreux, John de. Count of Brittany, 3i 

153, 208, 214. 
Dmry: Arms, 335. 
Dryden, Sir Henry, 44. 
Dublin, Archbishop, and Archi^isoopKl 

See of, 91, 358. 
Dublin, Bobert de Yere, K.G., Bfarqness 

of. 117,434. 
Dublin, Albert Edward, the Priooe of 

Wales, Earl of, 322, 324. 
Ducal Coronet, 101, 108, 488. See 

Crest-Coronet. 
Duchess, 103, 488. 
Dudley : Aims, 460. 
Dugdale, Sir William, 477. 
Duke, Bank, Style and TiUe of, 101, 

430; his Coronet and Bobes, 101. 

103, 488 ; his Sons and Daughten, 

103, 430, 488. 
Dunbar, Patrick of; 193, 223. 
Dunbar, the Earls of; Crest, 274. 
Dunsany, The Baron, 68. 
Dunstonville, William de, 209. 
Durham, Bishop and See of, 96. 
Durham Cathedral, 379. 
Dynevor, The Baron, 67. 
Dynham, The Lord, K.G.; Crest, ©, 

272. 

Eagle, Erne, Heraldic, 64. 



INDEX. 



619 



Eagle, Drawing of the, 452 ; early Ex- 
amples of, 452, 464 : of ancient Kome, 
472 ; of German Emperors, 234, 471 ; 
of Anstria, 471 ; of France, 469, 470 ; 
of Poland, 474; of Prussia, 472; of 
Russia, 473. 

Eaglet, 64, 158. 

Earl, Rank, Style, and Title oC 103, 
430; his Coronet and Robes, 104, 
488; his Sons and Daughters, 104, 
430. 

Earl Maridial of England, 112, 1S2, 
168. 

Earl's Colne: Mullets of the De Veres 
at, 201. 

Ears of Wheat, Barley, Ac, as Chaiges, 
71 ; Badge of Abbot John de Wheat- 
hamstede, 453, 457. 

East India Merchants, 367, 368. 

Eberstein : Arms, 313. 

Ecartelc, Escartel^ Quartel^ 160. 

Echebaston, Sir Richard d\ 201. 

Eddington, 261. 

Edmond ** Grouchbaok,** first Earl of 
Lancaster: Arms, 220, 234; Monu- 
ment, 38, 385, 387; Seals, 88, 220. 

Edmond, second Earl of Cornwall: 
Arms, Single Supporter, and Dimi- 
dated Shield, 146, 234. 

Edmond Plantagenet, **of Langley," 
K.G. : Arms, 23d-241 ; Badge, 431 ; 
Monument, 99, 220, 385, and fully 
described, 390. 

Edmond, *« of Woodstock," first Earl of 
Kent, 240 ; Arms, 235. 

Edmond. second Earl of Kent, 235, 
236. 

Edmond, &lt;* of York,** Earl of Rutland; 
Aims, 245, 246. 

Edmund de Holland, K.O., last Earl of 
Kent : Arms, 247. 

Edmund Tudor, ** of Hadham,** Earl of 
Richmond : Arms, 249. 

Edmund Beaufort See Beaufort 

Edward the Confessor. See Confiassor. 

Edward I.: Arms, 295; Badge, 304; 
Crown, 312 ; Qieat Seal, 295, 400, 
402; Monument 384; his Consort's 
Arms (1), 157, 306, and (2) 147, 807 ; 
his Heraldry in Westminster Abbey, 
12, 377. 

Edward I. as Prince Royal, 172, 219, 
234. 

Edward L entiUed "Prince of Wales,*' 
237. 

Edward IL: Arms, 295; Badge, 304; 
Crown, 98,316,317; Great &amp;al, 153, 
295, 400; Effigy and Monument 316, 
384 ; his Consort's Arms, 158, 307. 

Edward U. as Prince Royal, 219, 221, 
234 ; at Caerlamock, 287. 



Edward HI: Arms (before ajx 1340) t 
295, (after a.d. 1340) 158, 295, 388 • 
Crests, 266; Badges, 804; Giea^ 
Seals, 153, 295, 401, 402 ; Coins, 417 &gt;' 
Standards, 289 ; imputed Supporters* 
802; Effigy and Monument 92, 127* 
157, 162, 220, 287, 253, 384, described 
in full, 388 ; they are without any 
Insignia of the Garter, 343 ; Effigy at 
Elsyng, 161; his Consort's Arms, 
159, 307 ; Cadency of his Sons, 92, 
236-241. 

Edward III. as Prince Royal, 234. 

Edward IIL as Earl of Chester, 234, 
237. 

Edward IV.: Arms, 297; Badges, 43, 
304; Crown, 318; Supporters, 302; 
Great Seal, 319, 401 ; Seal for his 
Chancery of Monmouth, 414; his 
Consort's Arms, 165, 308 ; his Charter 
to the Order of the Garter, 342. 

Edward IV. as fourth Duke of York, 
245. 

Edward Y.: Arms, 297; Supporters, 
302. 

Edward Y. as Prince of Wales, 237, 250, 
259. 325, 414. 

Edward YI.: Arms, 297; Supporters, 
302; Crown, 318; Great Seal, 318; 
Badge, 305. 

Edwara YI. as nominally Prince of 
Wales. 250. 

Edward Plantagenet K.G., Earl of 
Chester, Duke of Cornwall, and Prince 
of Wales. See Black Prince. 

Edward Plantagenet K.G., Earl of 
Rutland, Duke of Albemarle, and 
second Duke of York : Arms, 243 ; his 
Consort's Arms, 24a 

Edward, Earl of Warwick, the " hist of 
the Plantagenets :" Arms, 246. 

Edward, of Norfolk, only son of Earl 
Thomas "de Brotherton,** 232, 410. 

Edward, K.G., Duke of Kent, 251. 

TCffing hftm, Howard, Earl of, 207. 

•Rfflngh^ifw^ Charles, Lord Howard of. 
Lord High Admiral : Seal, 412. 

Egertou : Arms, 462. 

££linton,The Earl of, 68. 

££renbeK : Arms, 462. 

Eighth Son, his Modem Difference, 
206. 

Ela Longesp^, Countess of Salisbury : 
Seal, 403* 

Eldest Son : his Modem Difference, 
206. 

Eldon, John Scott, Earl of, 207, 468. 

Eldred, John, the Navigator. 368. 

Eleanor. See Alianore. 

Elected Soyereigns : Arms, 474, 478. 

Elfoid. 121, 205, 267. 338. 



520 



INDBX. 



EUbanlc Lard, 207. 

Elizabeth : Anns, 297, 325 ; Snpporten, 

302; Badges and Motto, 805; Grown, 

818; one of her Seala, 414; CoixiB, 

417; Fimetal, 122; Moniiment, 384, 

deecribed m full, 392. 
Elintbeth Flantaweiiet, Cbantees of 

Holland, and of Herofiord and Eaeex, 

161. 
Elisibeth Flantagenet, of York, Dacheas 

of Suffolk, 103, 886. 
Elizabeth Flantagenet, of Lancaster, 

Dnohees of Exeter, 247. 
Elizabeth WidTille,or Woodyille, Queen 

Consort of England, 808. 
Elizabeth Flantagenet, **of York,*' 

Queen of England : Anns, 166, 808 ; 

Monnment, 884, 887, and folly de- 
scribed. 888. 
Elizabeth, The Frinoeas, 251. 
lElmahTjggd, Roger, 67, 194. 
Ehnhnr8t,74. 
Elsyng, Brass at, 38, 113. 127, 161,235, 

888. 
Eltham, John of. 8m John. 
Ely, Bishop and Bee oC 359. 
Ely Oathedral. 120. 
Embattled, Battled, 78, 81. 
EmUems, Sacred, 395; of the Eyan- 

geliBtfl^395. 
Embowed, 81. 
Embmed, 81. 
Emperor, The: Arms at Westminster 

Abbey and Great Yarmoath, 452; at 

Eing^s Langley, 453, 464. 
Endorse, 23, 43 ; Endorsed, 23. 
Enfield. Brass at, 114. 
Enfiled, 81. 
England Froper: Arms, 60; Boyal 

Arms of; 156, 295, 300, 331 ; Orest, 266. 

331 ; Supporters. 301. 808, 331, 375; 
. Motto, 1^2, 305, 331 ; Grown. 315, 

820 ; Badges, 305. 322 ; Boyal Monu- 
ments of; 383. 
Englethorpe, Isabel, 167. 
Engonle^, 81. 
Entailed, 18, 81. 
Enhanced, 81. 
Ensigned,81. 

Enyironn^, Environed, Enyeloped, 81. 
Episcopal Arms, 144, 358. 
Equipped, 81. 
Eradicated, 81. 
Erased. 81. 
Erect, 81. 

Ermine, William d', 218. 
Ermine, 20, 62. 106. 
Ermine-spots, Early Examples of, 453 ; 

for Differencing, 185, 205. 
Ermines. 20, 106. 
Erminois, 20, 106. 



Erpingham, Sir Thomas. 188^ 267. 
Erpingham Gate, Norwich Gatbedial, 

18&amp; 
Erskine, Sir Thomas: Simporters, 279; 

Giest,265. 
Erskine : Arms. 463. 
Escallop, 66; for Differencing, 192. 
E^Boarbuncle, 41, 809, 313. 
Escutcheon, 16, 106; of Fietenoe, 106. 
Esquire, 106, 488. 
Esquires, of the Order of the Bath, 350, 

378. 
Essex, Earldom of: Arms, 151. 
Essex, Geoffrey de Manderille, Ead of, 

41. 
Essex, Heniy Bonrchier. Earl o£ ^800 

Bourohier. . 

Essex, IsabeUe Flantagenet^ OountesB 

o£ fi^Eu. 
Este : Arms. 311. 
Estlee, Sir Nicholas. 201. 
Ebtofford, Stafford, Robert de^ 195. 
Estofford. Sir Giles. 201. 
Estoffoid. Sir Bobert de. 195. 
EstoUeg 43. 

EstorD^, Sir Thomas, 347. 
Eton Gollege: Arms, 364; Giant of 

Arms from Henry VI*, 364. 
Etton, De, 209, 225. 
En. and Essex, Henry Bourohier, K.O.. 

Earl of. See Bourchier. 
Eu, IsabeUe Flantagenet, Gonntess of; 

105. 226. 339. 385, 394. 
Eu. Alios, Gountess of, 405. 
Eureux : Arms, 166, 307. 
Evangelists, Emblems oi, 395. 
Ewehne, Effigy at. 344. 
Exeter, the See and Bishope of. 53. 

539. 
Exeter Oitfaedral, 123, 195, 228. 
Exeter Gollege. Oxford. 217. 361. 
Exeter, the Hollands, Dukes of; 247. 

248. 
Exeter, Gecil, the Marquess of, 281. 

Fair Boeamond. 154. 
Falcon and Fetterlock : Badge, 261. 
Falcon and Sceptre : Badge, 306. 
Falmouth, The Viscount, 68. 
False, Faux, 8f, 196. 
False Gross, 43. 
False Escutcheon, 43. 
False Boundle, 40, 43, 196. 
Fan, Winnowing Fan. 43, 282. 
Famham, Sir B. de, 193. 
Faroe Islands : Arms, 326. 
Fastolf, Sir John, KG., 192, 460. 
Faucombe, De : Arms, 181. 
Faucombe, Walter de, 187 . 
Fauoonberff. 459. 
Fauloonbridge, Boger, 204. 



INDEX. 



521 



Feathers, 65, 172 ; Feathered, 40. 
FeathezB. Ostrich, 72, 2S6, 260, 272. 

414. 
Feathers, Panache-Flmue ot, 121, 267, 

272. 
Felbrig, Braas at, 44, 261. 288. 
Felbrige, George ; Arms, 204. 
Felbrigge, Sir Symon, K.G. ; his fine 

Braas deBcribed, 890; his Banner of 

Richard H, 288 : Boysd Badges. 48, 

261; his Crest. 267; his Ins^ia of 

the Garter, 344, 387. 
Feld, John, his Tabard. 82, 131, 132. 
Felton, Sir Thomas, 267 ; Hehn, 270. 
Femme. 106. 

Fer-de-Molinet 43, 47, 270. 
Ferdinand IIL. King of OastUe and 

Leon, 157. 
Fermaile. Fermanx, 43. 
FeiT. 43. 

Ferrara: Arms. 311. 
Ferre^ Guy, 47, 148. 
Ferre, Eleanor, 148. 
Ferrers : Arms, 198, 215. 
Ferrers, Earls of Derby. 46, 125. 
Ferrers. Lord, of Chartley. 72; Greet. 

121. 198, 287. 
Ferrers. Ranfde, 197. 
Ferrers, William de. 197. 
Fersfield, 454. 
Fesse. 22, 43. 
Fesae Point, 16, 106. 
Fesse-Wiae. 81. 
Fetter-Look: Badge, 43. 261. 
Fictitious Heraldry, 443, 491. 
Field, 17. 106. 
Fifth Son: his Modem Difference, 

206. 
Figured, 81. 
File. 44. 
Fillet, 22. 44. 
Filliol, Matilda, Wife of Sir B. de. 406. 

407. 
Filliol : Arms. 407. 
Funbriation, 28 ; -Fimbriated, 28, 81. 
Finchley. 368. 
Finned, 82. 
Fir&lt;V&gt;nes. 76. 
Firm^. 82. 

Fish, Heraldic. 63, 65. 
Fishmongers' Company : Arms, 368. 
Fitoh^ S9. 82. 
FitsE-Alan : Arms, 162, 415 ; Badge, 839 ; 

Crest. 268, 273; Seals, 268. 272, 278, 

416; Efflffies. 105. 132, 336. 
Fitz-Alan, Alice de. Countess of Kent, 

247. 
Fitz-Alan. John. Earl of Arundel: 

Efflffy, 132, 336; Seal, 415, 4m 
Fits-Alan, Thomas, Earl of Arundel, 

105,336. 



Fitz-Alan, Bichard, Earl of Arundel, 
268. 

Fitz-Alan, Thomas (or Thomas Arun- 
del), Arehbishop of Canterbury, 217. 

Fitz-Alan, William, Earl of Arundel : 
Effigy of his Counteaa, at Arundel, 
339. 

Fitz-Alan, of Bedale, Brian, Lord : Arms, 
483. 

Fitz-Gerald, Juliana, 147. 

Fitz-Gerald, Duke of Leinster: Arms, 
463. 

Fitz-Geoffirey^ 198, 214, 45a 

Fitz-Hugh, Henry, 214 ; Edmund, 216. 

Fitz-Mannaduke, John, 211. 

Fitz-Mayhewe, 162. 

Fitz-Nichol. 178. 181. 192, 

Fitz-Payne, Robert le. 211. 

Fitz-Balph. 191. 

Fitz-Bandolf, 212. 

Fitz-Bau^ 198. 

FitzBoger. Bobert, 223. 459. 

Fitz-Simon, S. le. 42 ; J. le. 51. 

Fitz-Walter. Bobert de. 151, 213. 459. 

Fitz-Warren, Sir WUliam. K.G., 176, 
343. 

Fitz-Waryn. William, Lord, 226. 

Fitz-Waryn. Sir John, 176. 

Fitz-Waryn : Badge. 262. 

Fitz-William, R. de. 44. 194. 

Fitz-Gerald, Duke of Leinster : Arms, 
462. 

Fitz-William. Earl Fitz-William : Crests. 
273. 

Flag, Flags, 17. 82. 83. 286. 

Flags of England, 290, 292: 

Flags of Admirals. 291. 

Flags MiUtary. 291. 

Flags Naval, 290. 

Flags of Volunteers, 292. 

Flags. Foreign. See Chapter xxzii. 

Fhigon.44. 

Flaoohes. 32. 310; Flanched. 82. 

Flanders: Arms, 159, 163, 307. 

Flanders, Matilda df, The Queen, 306. 

Flaa^ues. 32. 

Flemmg, Hugh, Bishop of Lincoln, 
361. 

Fleurie.82. 

Fleur-de-lys, 72 ; its origin. 72 ; early 
modifications of its form. 73 ; &amp;st ap- 
pearance on a royal Seal of France. 
73 ; 8em€e de lye, 12, 73 ; dimidiated, 
148. 152; first appearance in Eng- 
land, 152, 407; of France. 189; for 
differencing. 189 ; drawing, and early 
examples dt, 452 ; no longer the he- 
raldic ensign of France, 469. 

Fleurett^, montiie, 82. 

Flexed. 82. 

Flighted, 40, 82. 



522 



INDEX. 



Flodden Field, The Battle of, 433^ 435. 

Florin. 418. 

Flotaat, 82. 

Fly. 17. 82. 

Foix« Blanche de, 229. 

Foiz. Gaston de, K.G., Count of Lon- 
gaeville, 228. 

Foiz, John de, K.G., Viflcount Chasti- 
lion. 229. 

Foix. William de, 158. 

Foliated, 82. 

Foidham. Bishop John de. 119. 

Fordwich. Anns of Cinque Ports at, 
149. 

Fontevraud, Royal Effigies of England 
at. 383. 

Foreign Effigies, 465. 

Foreign Heraldry, General Notice of, 
464 ; Cliaracteristio Uses of. 465 ; Be- 
peated Charges in, 465 ; Use of Dimi- 
diation in, 467 ; Collais of Kni^t- 
hood in, 468 ; Uae of Shields for De- 
coration in, 465; Labels of, 469; 
Lions of; 466; Mantlmgs of; 468; 
Supporters of; 468. 

Foreign Nobles and their Heraldic In- 
signia, 478 ; their Coronets, 480 ; their 
Titles, 479. 

Foreign Orders, Medals and Insignia, 
172. 353. 

Foreign Postage Stamps, 468. 

Formee, 29. 

Fortescue : Motto, 283. 

Fortibus, Aveline de. Countess of Lan- 
caster, 198, 385. 

Fortibus, William, Earl of Albemarle, 
198. 

Fotheringhay Church, Heraldry of; 377. 

Fountain. 25. 

Fourch^e. Queue Fourche^, 44, 82. 

Fourth Son; his Modem Difference, 
206. 

Fox, Bichard, Bishop of Winchester, 
120, 361. 

Fraises, 74. 

" France Ancient." 12, 158. 189. 297. 
401, 409 ; Dimidiated with England, 
147; with Navarre, 148; Quartered 
by Edward HL. 158. 295; fine Ex- 
amples of; 236, 378. 38a 

*• France Modern :" Adopted by French 
Kings, 159, 296; Suggested to Heniy 
IV., 307 ; and adopted by him, 159, 
297 ; fine Examples of the Quartered 
Shield, 297, 378, 393 ; Shield bearing 
the Flours de lys, one and two^ 414 ; 
Shield Quartering Enf^nd and France 
Modem, 297. 

" France Becent," 469. 

France, Imperial Arms of, 469, 470; 
Imperial Standard of, 470 ; National 



Flag of, 470 ; Old Flag of, 470 ; no 
longer represented by the Fleurs do 
lys, 469. 

Fruice, Boyal Cadency of, 470. 

France : Great Dignitaries and Dukes of 
the Empire ; their Arms. 470. 

France, Coronets of Nobility of. 480. 

France, Military Medal of, 354. 

Francis, Emperor of Austria, K.G., 
471. 

Eraser, Hugh, 217. 

Fraternities of Honour, 114, 333. 

Frazer : Arms, 74. 

Frederick H., King of Denmark and 
Norway, K.G., Arms, 310; Garter- 
Plate. 327, 475. 

Frederick VI., King of Denmark, K.Q.. 
475. 

Frederick Lewis, K.G., Prince of Wales. 
250. 

Fred^ck. K.G., Duke of York, 251. 

Frescheville, Bauf; 204. 

Fre8n^82. 

Fressel, Simon de, 75. 193. 

Frette, 32; Frett^ 32, 

Friedland, Due de, 466. 

Fructed,82. 

Fruits, Heraldic 76. 

Fumant, 82. 

Furnished. 82. 

Fumival, the Brothers, 174, 186. 

Furs, 19. 

Fusil, 32, 44 : Fusill^, Fuaily. 35, 82. 

Fylfot, 44. 486. 

Fyndeme, William, 201 

Gacelyn, Gaoeline, Sir Edmund* 194, 
212. 

Gacelyn, Sir John, 194, 212. 

Gacelyn, Sir Walter, 194, 212. 

Gads, Gadlyngs. 44. 

GaUey, 44, 446. 

Galtrap, Caltrap, 41. 

Game-cock, 64. 

Gant, William de, 210. 

Garbe. 74, 149. 446. 459. 

Gardant. Guardant, 83. 

Garde-Bras. 44. 

Garland, 44. 

Garnished, 82. 

Garshale, Thomas de, 212. 

Garter, Order of the : Foundation, 340; 
Statutes, 840; Knights CompanioQa, 
K.G., 340 ; Insignia and Habit, 341 ; 
Badge, 341 ; Collar and •• George," 
341, 342; Garter. 107, 341; Motto, 
341; Bibbon and "Lessar George," 
342 ; Star. 341 ; Stalls in St G«^'s 
Chapel. 340 ; Garter Platee, 108, 167, 
340, 341. 378 ; Banners. 340 ; Insignia 
of deceased K.G. returned to the Sore- 



INDEX. 



523 



reign, 343 ; Iiuigiua manhalled, 171 ; 
Examples of early Effigies of ILG. 
having Tnirignia of the Older, 843; 
Officers of the Order« and their In- 
signia, 342, 343 : no Esquires of the 
Order, 488; Ladies associated with 
the Order, 344. 

Garter King-of-Arms, 111. 112. 841, 
343; his Arms, 169, 365; Badge, 
343. 

Gasooyne Cecil, Marquis of Salisbury, 
207, 281. 

Gaston, Viscoont de Beam, 157, 158. 

Gaveston, Sir Arnold de, 157, 158. 

Qaveston, Piers de, Earl of Cornwall, 
157, 158. 

Genealogies, 422, 

Genealogies, Historical ; their utility and 
value. 423 ; System of framing them, 
423 ; Abbreviations, illustrations, and 
general sugKestions for framing them, 
423, 424 ; Examples, 425-427. 

Genet. 337. 

Geneville, de. Lords of Broyes: Arms, 
41, 60 ; their Cadency, 175, 212. 

Geoffiey. Count of Anjou. 303, 383, 405 ; 
Arms, 392. 

George I. : Arms, 299, 300 ; Arms of his 
Consort, 311 ; he changes the colour 
of the Ribbon of the Order of the 
Garter, 341. 342. 

George II.: Arms, 299, 300; Arms of 
his Consort, 312 ; as Prince of Walesa 
250. 

George IIL : Arms, 299, 800; Arms of 
his Consort, 312 ; as Prince of Wales, 
250; Cadency of the Princes and 
Princesses of his Family, 251. 

George IV. : Arms, 299, 300 ; Arms of 
his Consort, 312, 313 ; as Prince of 
Wales, 250 ; Arms of the Princess of 
Wales, his only child, 250. 

George Plantagenet, K.G., Duke of 
Cliunence. Earl qf Warwick and Salis- 
bury: Arms, 222, 246; Crest, 266; 
Mantling, 115; Seal, 278; Arms of 
his Consort. 246. 

George, of Denmark, K.G., 251, 311 ; 
Garter Plate, 475. 

** George," The, of the Order of the 
Garter. 342. 

George-Noble Ccoin), 417. 

Gerard, Peter, 132. 

Gerattyng, 82, 199. 

Germany : Arms, 307. 

Germany, Emperors ot 471. 472. 

Germany, Heraldry o^ 464 ; its Usages^ 
466, 467. 

Ghent, John of. iSeeJohn. 

Giilard, Sir Alexander ; his Cross-legged 
Effigy and Shield of Arms, 225. 



Gii&amp;id, Sir John ; his Brass and Shield 

of Anns, 190. 
Giffiird, Maigaret: Seal, 152. 
Giffietrd, Sir John : Arms, 152. 
GifEbrd : Arms, 52. 
Gillyflower, 74. 
Ginmiel-ring. 44, 203. 
Girt, Girded 82. 
Glay, De. of Innerwick, 217. 
Glendour : Arms, 460. 
Glendwyr. Owen, Prince of Wales, 325. 
Gliding, 82. 

Globe, The Terrestrial, 44. 
Gloucester Cathedral, Effigy of Edward 

n. in, 98, 316, 376; Hemldio Tiles 

in, 384. 
Gloucester, See and Bishop of, 359. 
Gloucester, Humphrey Plantagenet 

Duke ot See Humphrey. 
Gloucester, Richard Plantagenet, Duke 

of. See Richard IIL 
Gloucester. Thomas Plantagenet, Duke 

of. Bee Thomas. 
Gloucester, William Stuart, K.G.,Duke 

of; 251. 
Gloucester, William Henry, K.G.. Duke 

of, 251. 
Gloucester. William Frederick, K.G., 

Duke of, 252. 
Gobony, Cbmpony, 82. 
Gold, 10. 
Golden Fleece, Order and Insignia o^ 

355, 478. 
Goldsmiths' Company, 369. 
Gonaldston, Effigy at, 125. 
Gonfannon, 108. 
Gk)nville and Caius College, Cambridge : 

Arms, and original Grant, 363. 
Goodryke, Thomas. Bishop of Ely. 120. 
" Good Service Medals," 353. 
Gordon : Badge, 263. 
Gk&gt;rge, Gurge, 45. 
Goiged, 82. 
Gorges, B. de, 45, 197. 
Gorget, 109. 
Gorlestoii, Brass at, 212. 
Gothic Architecture essentially heraldic, 

372. 
Goutt^Gutt^delarmes,d'azure. d'eau, 

d'olive, d'or. de poix, du sang, 77. S2. 
Gontt^ reversed, 77, 82. 
Gower, John, 336, 461. 
Gower : Arms quartered by the Duke of 

Sutherland, 462. 
Gradient, 82. 
Grafted, 82. 

Grafton, the Duke oC 438. 
Grafton Regis, 271. 
Graham: Arms. 66. 192, 213; Badge, 

263. 
Graham, Duke of Montrose, 462. 



524 



INDEX. 



Orandiscm: Aimi, 211 ; Oanton dt, 209. 

GxandiaoD, Biahop John de, 211. 

Gmnduon, William de» 211. 

Giand Qiiarten, 16. 108. 

GnnTille : Aims, 42, 462. 

GnnyiUft-Leveson-Gower, Duke of 8a- 
therland, 462. 

Graveney, Bibsb a^ 43. 

Groat Britaui, Endgn oi, 27. 

Groat MaWeni, 45, 53, 396. 

Groat pii^Trhi^w, 868. 

Groat Seals, 319, 399, 400; described, 
295, 296, 299, 401; Obverse, 401; 
of the Commonwealth, 402 ; of Princes 
and Nobles, 402, 412; of John, '« of 
Ghent," 402 ; of Thomas, second Earl 
of Lancaster, 402 ; of Thomas, Dnke 
ofGloace8tar,403. 

Great Yarmouth : Arms, 148 ; Seal, 413. 

Great Yannonth, Shields of Arms in the 
Parish Ohuroh of; 149, 218, 222, 239, 
242,377. 

Greece: Aims, Snpporten, Motb\ En- 
sign. 474. 

Greeces,45. 

Greek Gross, 26. 

Green : Arms, 310. 

Greenland : Arms, 326. 

Greilly, John do, Oaptal de Bach, 229. 

Grenada, 308. 

Grovel. William; his fine Brass, 118. 

Gr^, Sir Anthony, 339. 

Grey, De : Anna, 35. 

Grey, the Lady Jane, Qneen, 423, 425. 

Grey, the Lady Mary, 423. 

Grey, Walter, Archbishop of YcmtIc, 100. 

Grey, John de, 211. 

Grey, Richard de, 224. 

Grey, Thomas,;K.G.. Marqness of Dorset, 

Grey.Boger, Lord, of Bntbyn, 389; 

Badge, 262. 
Griffin, Gryphon, 67, 150. 
Grimstone, Sir Edward, 185. 
Grimstone, Earl of Verulam, 185. 
Grocers' (&gt;&gt;mpany, 368. 
Groe, Sir Renard le, 187. 
GroBvenor, Sir Robert, 216. 
Gryphon, Ooward, 67. 
Gueldres : Arms, 163. 
Gaeldres, Mary of, 278. 
"Guide to the Study of HerBldiy," 

Montagu's, Reference to, 409. 
Guige, 15. 
Guildford, 358. 
Guilds: Arms, 367. 
Gules, 19, 108. 
Gunby, Brass at, 182, 336. 
Gwilt, Mr., his Ordinary of the Arms 

in the Roll of Heniy ILL, edited by 

Sir Harris Nicholas, 482. 



GyiOD, 31 ; Gyranny, Gyreim&lt;$e, 35, 82* 

Haberdashen* Oompany, 369. 

Habited, 12, 82. 

Hackle, 45. 

Hadfield, Hatfield, Bishop Thomas: his 

Monument in Durham Oathedral, 1 19. 

379. 
Hainault. See Philippa. 
Hakebut, Riohaid, 190. 
Halberstadt ; Arms, 312. 
Hallam, Robert, Bishm&gt; of SalisbwT, 

107. 
Haltwhistle, 48. 
Hamburgh Merehants, 367. 
Hameldene, Lawrence, 191. 
Hames. Heames, 45. 
Hamilton, of Innerwick, 217. 
Hammer, 45, 125. 
Hammer-Beams, with Shields of Anns, 

in Westminster Hall, 490. 
Hammerton : Rebus, 125. 
Hampeon, Sir Q. F., 45. 
Hampton Court Palace, 129, 309. 
Hands, Human, 56, 125. 
Hanoyer: Arms, Ensign, and National 

Coloors, 476. 
Hanoyer, Boysl Family of the Hoose at, 

299. *• 
Hanoyer, Electoral Bonnet of, 250. 
Hapsburgh, Arms of the House of, 

471. 
Haroourt, Thomas de Beaufort, K.G., 

Earl of, 248. 
Haroourt, Sir Robert, KG., 108, 339, 

344; Mantling, 115. 
Haroourt, Lady, 108, 344. 
Haroourt, Sir John (two Coats), 175. 
Hardinse : Crest, 273. 
Harford, Anthony, 210. 
Harford, with Oanton of Scrape, 210. 
Harp, 45; Badge of Ireland, 322. 
Haipedene, Sir John de, 180, 204. 
Harpedene, Sir William de, 204. 
Harpham, Brasses at, 182, 214, 270. 
Harpur Chewe : Anns, 229. 
Harpy, 67. 
Harris, 125, 461. 

Haranett, Archbishop Samuel, 119. 
Harsyck, Sir Thomas : Anns and Crest, 

72, 115, 121 ; Crest and Wreath, 134, 

264. 
Hart, 63, 125; Crest of Ireland, 332 ; 

Badge of Henry, of Bolmgbroke, 258 ; 

Badge of Richard U., 263, 278, 304, 

454. 
Hajftings : Arms, 47, 151 ; Labels, 176 ; 

Badges, 262, 284. 
Hastings, Sir Hugh, 38, 287; his Brass, 

161,388; Greet, Wreath, and Mant- 
ling, 115, 134. 



INDKX. 



525 



Hastings, John de, K,Q,y Earl of Pem- 
broke, 161 ; bis Borooat, 113; Shield, 
172. 

Hastings, John de; his Bofdure of 
Valence, 215. 

Hastings, Lawrence de ; Earl of Pem- 
broke, 389. 

Hastings, the Earl ; his Banner at Oaer- 
layerodc, 176. 

Hastings, Edmund de, his Banner at 
Caer&amp;verock, 176. 

Hastings, William, K.G., Lord; his 
MantUng, 116. 

Hatohet, 45. 

Hatchment, 108; Modem, 444; ezem- 

Slification of Heraldio Debasement, 
45, 456. 

Hatfield Broadoak, 38. 

Haughton, 442. 

Haorient, 66, 82. 

Hause, 83. 

Hauteville, Geol&amp;ey de, 182. 

Hawberk, Sir Nicholas ; Figure of Si 
Geoige in his Brass, 127. 

Hawk, 275. 

Hawk's Lure, 45 ; Bell and Jesses, 45. 

Hawkestone, Sir T., 198. 

Hay, Jean de la, 71. 

Hay, Raufdela, 71. 

Haydon, John, 194. 

Hazel Leaves, 74. 

Hazelrigg, 74. 

Hedgehog, Herrison, 125. 

Heightened, 82. 

Heir, Arms of, 137. 

Heiress and Go-heiresses, Arms of, 140, 
141. 

Heiress, Husband of, 142. 

Heiress, Son of, 140 ; Daughters of, 143. 

Helena, H.R.H., the Princess, 252, 331. 

Helm, Heanme, Hehnet, 45, 109; 
Modem, 109 ; in Blazon, 171 ; Draw- 
ing of, 454 ; fine Examples of, 455. 

Hemenhale, Sir R. de, 192. 

Hemp-broke, Hackle, 45. 

Heneage-knot, 284. 

Henlington, of Gloucestershire : Arms, 
461. 

Hennebuigh, 313. 

Henniker, the Baron, 283. 

Henrietta Maria, Queen Consort of Eng- 
land, 311. 

Henry I, : Arms, 295 ; Arms of Gonsort, 
306. 

Henry XL: Arms, 295; Grown, 315; 
Badges, 304; Effigy, 383; Arms of 
Consort, 306. 

Heniy IIL : Arms, 295 ; Grown, 61, 316 ; 
Badge, 304 ; his Heraldry in West- 
minster Abbey, 12, 377 ; the Era of 
true Heraldry in England commenoes 



with his Beign, 4 ; the existing Bolls 
of Arms of his Period, 481 ; his Great 
Seals, 400 ; his Monument and Effigy, 
38, 384 ; Arms of Consort, 306. 

Henry IV.,— Hengr Plantagenet, "of 
Bolingbroke": Royal Arms, 297; 
Quarters " France Modem," 73, 159, 
297 ; Grown, 316, 317 ; Royal Badges, 
304; attributed Supporters, 302; 
Great Seals, 401 ; Secretum, 258 ; his 
heraldic Slab at Yenioe, 258 ; Monu- 
ment and Effigy at Ganterbuiy, 100, 
165, 384, 486 ; fuUy described, 337, 
391 ; Arms of his Queen, 41, 166,307, 
337. 

Henry IV., before his Accessbn, as Earl 
of Derby and Hereford, and Duke of 
Herefoid and Lancaster : Arms, 164, 
221, 242 ; Badge, 257 ; Standaid, 286 
Aims of Consort, 164. 

Henry V. : Aims, 297 ; Grown, 318, 319 
Badges, 40, 304, 377, 394 ; attributed 
Supporters, 302; Monument, 384; 
Arms of Consort, 307 ; his Standard- 
Bearer, 383, 394 ; as Prince of Wales, 
116, 230, 237. 

Henry VI. : Arms, 165, 297; Grown, 319 ; 
Supporters, 302 ; Badges, 304 ; Motto, 
304 ; Coins, 417 ; Arms of Consort, 
307, 308 ; his Grants of Arms to Eton 
and King's Colleges, 363, 364. 

Heniy VIL: Arms, 297, 378; Crown, 
318, 319; Supportere, 302; Badges, 
307 ; Great Seals, 401 ; Coins, 417 ; 
Amis ofConsort, 166, 308; his Chapel 
at Westminster, with his Monument 
and Effigy, 76, 129, 166, 260, 350, 
378, 384; bis Armorial Insignia at 
King's Chapel, Gambridse, 378. 

Henry VII., before his Acoessum, as 
Earl of Richmond, 249. 

Henry VIII. : Arms. 297 ; Crown,319 ; 
Supporters, 802 ; Badges, 305 ; Great 
Seals, 401; Coins, 417; Grants and 
Augmentations, 165, 434; Amis of 
Consorts, 308-310 ; their Badges, 305. 

Henry VIH, before his Accession, as 
Duke of York, 249; as Prince of 
Wales, 250. 

Henry Plantagenet, Third Earl of Lan- 
caster, 235 ; Seals, 173, 397. 408. 

Heiuy Plantagenet, Fourth Earl and 
First Duke of Lancaster, the Second 
Shiglish Duke, 101. 235; his Effigy 
atElsyng, 113 ; Seals, 278, 408. 

Henry Stuart, K.G., Prince of Wales, 
250, 260. 

Henry IL, King of France, K.G., 471. 

Hepbum : Anns, 463 ; Motto, 283. 

Herald. Heralds, 110, 111; their Offi- 
cial Habit, 112: Duties, 112, 439; 



526 



INDEX. 



Titles, 111; Modern, their varied 
and important Datiea, and their Offi- 
cial Authority and lUghts, 439, 444. 

Heralds, King8K&gt;f-Ann8, 111, 116 ; their 
Arms, 144, 365 ; Crowns. 112; Badge 
of Garter, 343. 

Herald's College, College of Anns, 111 ; 
Arms of. 112. 364, 422 ; Crest, 364 ; 
Supporteo^ 364. 

Heralds, and Heralds' Office, or Lyon 
Office, of Scotland, 112, 365. 

"Herald and Genealogist,*' Beferenoes 
to, 193, 200. 

Heraldic Art, the Stady o^ 449; early 
Illustrations of, 448. 

Heraldic Character of Early Monuments, 
381. 

" Heraldic Debasement," 442 ; specially 
exemplified in Modem Hatcnments, 
456. 

Heraldic Character of Gothic Arohitect- 
ure, 373, 375. 

Hemldic Jewellery, 441. 

Heraldic Treatment, Drawing and 
Colour, 448. 

Heraldic Terms in Bolls of Arms, 483, 
487. 

Heraldic Materials prepared by Winsor 
and Newton, 457. 

Heraldic Sails, 288. 

Heraldiy, Definition of, 5; Language, 
8; Nomenclature, 9; Abbreviation 
and Punctuation, 10;. Law of Tinc- 
tures, 11, 465 ; Epithets, 12 ; Shields, 
13, 440. 

Heraldry, an Art, 448 ; of Arohitectore, 
373 ; of the Cathedrals, 377 ; a Chro- 
nicler, 375; of Coins, 416; of Cos- 
tume, 114, 383; Debasement of, 442, 
456 ; Foreign, 464 ; of France, 464, 
471 ; of Germany, 464, 469 ; of Illu- 
minations, 419 ; of Inlaid Pavements, 
376 ; of Monuments, 380 ; Official and 
Corporate, 357 ; of Paving Tiles, 376 ; 
of Seals, 397 ; of Stained Glass, 376. 

Heraldry, in Alliance with Gothic 
Architecture, 372, 373 ; its Claims on 
Gothic Architects, 375. 

Heraldry, Modem, 439 ; its trae Charac- 
ter and Dignity, 440 ; Use of Badges 
in, 441 ; Examples of the Trae, 444 ; 
Cadency in, 443; Pseudo-Heralds 
and Fictitious Heraldry, 443, 444, 
491; "Pictorial," 441; Examples 
from the " Peerage,*' 441 ; from other 
Sources, 442; of the New Palace at 
Westminster, 441; a Plea for its 
Nobleness, 445. 

Heraldry, Treatises on. Authorities and 
Writers, 481—485. 

"Heraldry of Fish," by Mr. Moule, 



illustrated by Miss Barbara Moule, 
a Model Treatise on Heraldry, 66, 
269, 456. 

Herefoid Cathedial, 267, 343. 

Hereford, Bisliops and See of, 63, 359. 

Hereford, Earls ot See Bohun. 

Heriz, De ; Bebus, 125 ; Arms, 41&amp; 

Herqn : Arms, 204, 461. 

Heron, Gerard, John, Walter, and Wil- 
liam, 204, 

Heron's Head; Ciest, 269. 

Herteley, De : Bebus, 125. 

Hesse: Arms, 331. 

Hesse-Damistadt, 331, 476. 

Hever, Brass at, 105, 344. 

Hewes, Thomas de, 208. 

Heytesbuiy: Arms, 410. 

Heyworth : Amis, 454. 

High Admirals, Seals of, 412. 

Higham Ferrers, 368. 

Hildersham, Brass at, 193. 

HiU, HiUock, 74. 

Hillingdon, Brass at, 335. 

HUted,82. 

Hilton, Sir William de, 407. 

Hinckley, the Honour of, 288. 

Hind, 63, 277. 

Hohenstaufer : Arms, 472. 

HohenzoUem : Arms, 312, 473. 

HohenzoUem, John George, Prinoe of, 
473. 

Hohnstein : Arms, 313. 

Hoist, 17, 82. 

Hoja : Arms, 313. 

Holly-Leaves, 74, 311. 

Holv Trinity, Shield Emblematic of, 395. 

Holland, the Countess of, 159 ; Arms, 
163. 

Holland, the Kingdom of: Arms, Sup- 
porters, Standara and Flag, 477. 

Holland Ancient, 190, 459. 

Holland, Edmund de, K.G., Fourth Earl 
of Kent, 247. 

Holland, Bobert de, 247. 

Holland, Blargaret, de, Duchess of 
Clarence, 244. 

Holland, Matilda de. Countess of Devon, 
227. 

Holland, Otho de, K.G., 190, 202, 247. 

Holland, Sir Thomas, K.G., 190, 202, 
240, 247. 

Holland, Thomas de, E.G., Second Eazl 
of Kent: Arms, 126, 247; Seals, 163, 
277, 409 ; Supporter, 277, 409. 

Holland, Thomas de. Third Earl of Kent 
and Duke of Surrey, 247; Seal, 409. 

Holland, John de, K.G., Earl of Hun- 
tingdon and Duke of Exeter, 247; 
Seals, 412 ; Heraldic Sail, 412. 

Holland, John de, K.G., Second Duke 
of Exeter and Earl of Huntingdon, 248. 



INDEX. 



527 



Holland, John de, Third and last Dnke 
of Exeter, 248. 

Hollandfl, de, their Oadency, 247; their 
Shields of Arms at King's Langley, 
240. 

Holstein : Arms, 311. 

Hombeig : Arms, 313. 

Home : Motto, 284. 

Honour, Augmentations o( 93, 165, 309, 
433. 

Honour, Decorations of, 352. 

Honour Point, 16, 113. 

"Honours," the, of Begimental Colours, 
435. 

Honomahle Insignia marshalled, 172. 

Hoo, Thomas, 67. 

Hood; Motto, 283. 

Hooded, 83. 

Hoofed, 83. 

Homed, 83. 

Horse-shoe, 46, 125. 

Horsted Keynes, 487. 

Hospitallers, Knights, 28, 113, 333. 

Hoveringham, 336, 344. 

Howard: Aims, 112; Orimial Arms, 
183; "Ancient," 434; Differenced, 
205; "Modem," 433, 434, 443; 
Badge, 262 ; Crest, 273 ; Lion, 55. 

Howara, Katharine, Queen Consort of 
England, 310. 

Howard, Elizabeth de, 167. 

Howard, Thomas, Duke of Norfolk, Aug- 
mentation of his Arms, 433. 

Howard, Charles, Lord, of Efl^gham, 
High Admiral : Seal, 412. 

Howard, Charles, 205. 

Howden, Effigy at, 182. 

Human Beings, 55. 

Humett^e, 83. 

Humphrey Plantagenet, K.G., Duke of 
Qlouoester : Arms, 254 ; Arms of Con- 
sorts, 254 ; Monument at Si Alban's, 
254, 385, 413. 

Hungary : Arms, 307, 472 ; Supporters, 
Crown, and National Colours, 472. 

Hungerford: Badge, 262, 410. 

Hungerford, Robert, Lord, 336. 

Hungerford, Sir Robert de, 262, 411. 

Hungerford, Margaret de : Seal, 411. 

Hungerford, Sir Thomas, first " Speaker," 
411. 

Hungerford, Walter, Lord, 410. 

Huntingdon, John Holland, Earl of, 
247. 

Hunting Horn, 46. 

Hunton, Prior : Rebus, 123. 

Hurst, 74. 

Huisthelve, William de, 45. 

Hurte, 46; Hurtee, 83. 

Husband and Wife, Arms of, 139. 

Hussey : Aims, 410. 



Hnssey, Joan de, 411. 

Ibex, Heraldic Antelope, 68. 

Iceland : Arms, 326. 

"lchDien,"72. 

Illegitimacy, Abatement of, 436; not 
necessarily hereditary, 438. 

Bluminatiou, 113; Heraldry of, 419. 

Illumination, Manual of, 113. 

Illumination, Reviyal of the Art, 419 ; 
Suggestion for present Practice, 420 ; 
modem Varieties^ 420 ; Adyantage of 
Heraldry, 421 ; good Subjects, 421 ; 
Outlines, 421. 

Imaginary Beings, 66. 

Imbattled, Embattled, 18. 

Imbmed, Imbued, 83. 

Impalement, Impaled, 16, 83, 113 ; Ex- 
amples of; 139 — 161 ; of Bordure and 
Tressure, 32, 113 ; as first used, 146. 

Imperially crowned, 83. 

In Bend, 24, 84. 

InCheyroD, 24,84. 

InChief, 24, 84. 

In Cross, 24, 30, 84. 

In Fesse, 24. 84. 

In Foliage, 84. 

In Gloiy, 12, 84. 

In Lure, 84. 

In Orle, 32. 

In Pale, 24, 84. 

In PUe, 24, 84. 

In Pretence, 16. 

In Pride, 64, 84. 

In Quadrangle, 84. 

In Saltire, 24, 84. 

In Splendour, 84. 

Incensed, 84. 

Increment, Increscent, 12, 71, Si, 

Indented, 18, 84. 

India, Grants of Arms to Natiye Gentle- 
men of, 446. 

Inescutcheon, 16, 31. 

Inflamed, 84. 

Ingham, 335. 

Inheritance of Arms, 135, 136. 

Inner Temple, Barristers of the : Badge, 
334. 

Insects, Heraldic, 63. 

Institutions and Associations: Arms,145. 

Interlaced, 84. 

International Exhibition of 1862, 450. 

Inyected, 18, 84. 

Inyerted, 84. 

lona, 46. 

Ipswich : Arms, 149. 

Ipswich, Brasses at, 49, 118. 

Ireland: Arms, 393; Arms assigned to, 
434; Badges, 832; National Deyioes, 
27, 45, 75; Crest, 832; the Anns« 
quartered in the Royal Shield of 



528 



INDEX. 



England, 299; included in the 

" l&amp;ion Jack," 27, 290. 
Ireland, Biahope of, 95. 
Ironmongers' Company and Hall, 53, 

369. 
Irradiated, 84. 
Isabel, of Angoul^me, Queen Gonaoit of 

England, Anna, 306, 385. 
laabeUe, of France, Queen Gonaort of 

England, 401 : Arma, 134, 152, 158, 

807. 
laabel, of France, Queen Consort of 

England, Arma, 166, 307. 
laabeUe Plantagenet, Counteaa of Essex 

and Eu, 226; her Coronet, 105; her 

Brass, 339, 385. 8m Henry Bour- 

chier, Earl of Essex. 
IsUy, Boottish Herald, 112. 
Isles, Lord of the, 322, 324. 
Isle of Man : Arms, 56, 487. 
IsUp, Abbot: Bebua, 124. 
laauant, 84. 
Italy : Arms and Boyal Btandaid, 477. 

Jacqueline, of Holland, Dncheas of 

Gloucester, 245. 
Jacqueline, of Luxemburgh, DuchesB of 

Bedford, 244. 
James L, of Great Britain : Anna, 298 ; 

Crown, 319; Badges, 305; Crest of 

Scotland, 415; Supporters, 280; 

Motto, 394; Coins, 418; Arma of 

Consort, 311 ; inatitutea Baronets, 94 ; 

hia Shield at Weatminater, 393. 
Jamea U., of Great Britain : Arma, 298; 

Badges^ 305; Supporters, 303; Aims 

of Conaort, 311. 
Jamea IL aa Duke of York, 251. 
Jamea L, of Scotland: Secretum, 280, 

414. 
Jamea U., of Scotland : Seal of hia 

Queen, 163. 
James III., of Scotland : Losenge-of- 

Arms of his Queen, 327. 
James IV. of Scotland : Crest of Scotland 

on his Great Seal, 414; his I&gt;eath at 

Flodden, 433. 
James V. of Scotland : Great Seal and 

Garter-Plate, 414. 
Jane (the Lady Jane Grey), Queen of 

England, 423, 425. 
Jane Seymour, Queen Consort of 

England : Arms, 309 ; Badge, 305. 
Jaspar Tudor. See Tudor. 
Jayelin, 46. 
Jerusalem, Crusader Kings of: Anns, 

8,11. 
Jerusalem : Anns, quartered by Margaret 

ofAnjou,307; Arms, modified, borne 
|fe- by Lewis de Beaumont, Bishop of 

Durham, 219. 



Jerusalem, Knights of St. John of, 333. 

Jessant, Jessant de lys, 63, 84. 

Jesses, Jessed, 46, 84. 

Jesus College, Oxford, 362. 

Jesus College, Cambridge, 363. 

Jewel. See Badge. 

Joan, Joanna of NaTsne, Queen Ccmaort 
of England : Arma, 42, 165, 166, 307 ; 
Monument and ita Henddiy, 337, 
384, 391 ; her Collar of SS., 836. 

Joan, second Daughter of Edward I., 
Counteaa of Gloucester, 406. 

Joan, " of Kent,** first Princess of Wales, 
236 {See Corrigenda, p. 547), 240. 
247. 

Joan De Barr, Countess of Surrey ; Seal, 
150, 405. 

John, King of England : Arms, 295 ; 
Crown,315; Badge, 304; Great Seal, 
295 ; Monument and EfSgy in Wor- 
cester Cathedral, 384. 

John, "of Eltham," Earl of Cornwall : 
Arms, 154, 214, 235; Effigy, 131; 
Basinet, 101 ; Monument, 385. 

John Plantagenet, *'of Ghent,** K.G., 
Duke of Lancaster, King of Castile 
and Leon : Arma, 289 ; Badges, 48, 
261; Great Seal, 402; 8^ 164, 
261, 278 ; Arma of Conaorta, 239. 

John Plantagenet, K.G.,I&gt;uke of Bed- 
ford, &amp;c.: Arma, 244; Label, 222, 
229; Great, 266; Arma of Consorts, 
244. 

John, Third Earl of Kent, 286. 

John, King of Bohemia, 257, 465. 

John, King of France, 434. 

John Gecnge, Duke of Saxony, K.G., 
477. 

Johnatone, Sir W. B., 68. 

Jouata, 113. 

Jowlopped, 84. 

Juliers : Arms, 313. 

Jupon, 113, 131. 

Jutland : Arms, 310. 

Juxon, Archbiahop : Arms, 56. 

Keith, E^l of Kintore, 435. 

Kempe, John, Archbishop of Oaater- 
buiy, 96. 

Kendall, John Plantagenet, Earl of. 
See John, Duke of Bedford. 

Kendall, John de Foix, Earl of, 229. 

Kendall, E. de, 210. 

Kent, Hubert de Buigh, Earl of: Seal, 
197, 

Kent, Joan of. See Joan. 

Kent, Edmond, Edmond and John, 
Earls of. See Edmond, Edmond and 
John. 

Kent, the Hollands, Earls o£ iSse Hol- 
land. 



INDKX. 



529 



Kerridon, Sir Edward, 99 ; Blazon of 
his Arina from the " Baronetage/' 442. 

Key, 40. 

Kilfane, Effigy at, 196. 

Kings-of-Arms, 111, 113; Arms, 365; 
Crown, 357. 

King' sCollege, Oambridgo : Arms, r,63. 

King's College Chapel, Cambridge, He- 
raldy of, 76, 162, 309, 377, 378; 
Noble Examples of Heraldic Animals 
at, 454. 

King's Langley, Plantagenet Monument 
at, 99, 162, 239, 385, 390; Labels of 
Plantagenet Shields, 222; Vemey 
Monument at, 205. 

Kintore, The Earl oC 435. 

Kirkham Priory Gateway, 379. 

Kirkpatrick, 43. 

Kirkpatrick, of Closebum : Crest, 274. 

Knights, 113, 333; Bannerets, 114,489; 
Conmianders of the Bath, 347; of 
the Garter, 341 ; their Precedence, 
343; Grand Cross of the Bath, 347 ; 
Hoepitallers, 28, 333 ;' of St. Michael 
and St. George, 350 ; of St. Patrick, 
345, 491 ; of the Star of India, 351 ; 
Templars, 28, 334; of the Thistle, 
345 ; of Foreign Orders of Knight- 
hood, 353, 468. 

Knights of Orders ; Marshalling of their 
Arms, 168, 171,468. 

Knolles, Bobert, 194. 

Knots, 46, 284. 

Kydesbye, Sir William, 214. 

Kyriell, Sir Thomas, his Boyal Canton, 
209. 

Kyriell, John, 209. 

Kyrkeby, Richard de, 209. 

Labarte, his "Handbook of Arche- 
ology," 384. 

Label, 33, 46; for Differencing, 205; 
Cadency marked by, 219 ; of Modem 
Cadency, 203, 

Labels, Early ; their Form and Blazon, 
220; Points, 220; Various Forms, 
445; Differenced, 221; Examples, 
223 : in Roll of Henry Ilf., 222 ; in 
CierlayerockRoU, 223; in Calais Roll, 
223. 

Labels of Wales, 236, 250; of France, 
242; of Lancaster, 244; of York, 
240; of Brittany, 239; of NevUle, 
203; of Longesjpl^, 224. 

Labels borne as Charges, 461 , 469. 

Labels in Foreign Heraldry, 469. 

Laci, Lacy, Do : Arms, 25, 162. 

Laoi, Sir John de, 187, 219, 220, 223. 

Laci, Hemy de. Earl of Lincoln : Seals, 
404, 412 ; Banner, 288, 485. 

liBcy Knot, 284. 



Laing, Mr. J. J. ; his " Manual of Illu- 
mination," 113. 

Laing's " Catalogue of Ancient Scottish 
Seals," 330 ; its Excellence and Value, 
and the admirable Drawing of the 
Examples, 491 ; the Second Series, 491. 

Lambrequin, 114. 

Laminated, Scaled, 84. 

Lancaster, Aveline, Countess of, 198, 
385. 

Lancaster, Blanche, of, Duchess of Lan- 
caster. 239. 

Lancaster, Edmund, First Earl of, 234. 

Lancaster, Thomas, Second Earl of, 235, 
267, 402. 

Lancaster, Henry, Third Earl of, 235, 
408. 

Lancaster, Henry, Fourth Earl and First 
Duke of, 235, 408. 

Lancaster, John, "of Ghent," Second 
Duke of, 48, 239. 

Lancaster, Henry, "of Bolingbroke," 
Third Duke of, 164, 242. 

Lancaster, Collar of S8. of, 337 ; Rose, 
75, 76, 260, 303, 304, 305. 

Lancaster, John de, 209. 

Lancaster, William de, 209. 

Lancaster, Sir Thomas, 199. 

Lancaster Hemid, 111. 

Landesberg : Arms, 313. 

Landseer, Sir Edwin, R.A., 375. 

Lane, of Bentley, 435. 

Lane, Jane, 435. 

Lanenburg, 326. 

Langforde, Sir Nicholas, 212. 

Langley, Edmond, of. See Edmond. 

Lfingley, Bishop Thomas, 205, 

Langton, Bishop : Rebus, 123. 

Langued, 85. 

Lansdowne, The Marquess of, 273. 

Laoms. See Lothian. 

Lascelles, Roger de, 407. 

Lfitham, Lathom : Arms, 460. 

Latham, Sir Thomas, 195. 

Latin Cross, 26. 

Latton, Brass at, 197, 205. 

Latymer, Lord. See Neville. 

Latymer, Thomas le, 228. 

Latymer, William le, 228. 

Laurel Leaves, 4, 125. 

Lauterbergh, 313. 

" Law and Practice of Heraldry in Scot- 
land," by Mr. Seton, a truly Heraldic 
and truly admirable Work, 415, 456. 

" Law and Prectioe of Scottish Peerages," 
by Mr. Riddell, 193. 

Law and Usage of Inheritance of Armo- 
rial Insignia, 137. 

Lawrence, Sir John, 100. 

Leake, Garter : his Tracings of Garter- 
Plates, 130. 

2 M 



530 



INDEX. 



Leaah, 4e. 

lieaves, 74. 

Leeds, tbe Dak6 of, 273. 

Lepjjcd, Menibered, 85. 

Legion of Honour, of France, 354. 

Legs, Human, 54 ; of AnimuU, 59. 

Leicester, Simon do Montfort, Earl of, 

288. 
Leinstcr, the Duke of, 462. 
Lennox, Mtirgaret Douglas, Countess of: 

8cai, 163; Mimument, 38U; Shields 

of Anus on her Monument, 184; 

Lr)zenge of Anus on her Monument, 

394. 
Ler»pard, 57 ; the Term still applied to 

the Lion Passant by Frt^nch Heralds, 

487. 
Leopold, H.R.H.. the Prince. 252, 331. 
Leopold, the King of the Belgians, K.G., 

250, 474. 
Leslie, Bartholomew, 283. 
Leslie, Euphemia, Countess of Ross, 279. 
L«'8lie, Walter, Lord, of Ross : Seal, 415. 
L'E^pan, near Mans, 383. 
•• Lesser George," of the Order of the 

Garter, 342. 
L'Kstrange, Strange, Le Strange : Aims, I 

57, 459. 
L' Estrange, Roger, 215. 
Letters of the Alphabet, bomo as 

Charges, 46, 405. 
Levant or Turkey Merchants, 368. 
Leventhorpe, Thomas, 242, 387. 
Leveson: Arms, 70, 74. 125, 462. 
Leyboume, Leybum, Leybume : Arms, 

408, 459. 
Iieyboume. Juliana de, 408. 
Leyboume, Sir Roger de : Seal, 411. 
Leyboume, Sir Thomas de, 408. 
Leyke, Andrew de, 196. 
Levke, John de, 196. 
Leyke, Robert de, 196. 
Lincoln, the Bishop and See of, 55, 359. 
Lincoln Oitliedral, 162, 385. 
Lincoln, William Romare III., Earl of. 

196, 403. 
Lincoln, Henry de Laci, Earl of, 25. 288. 

404. 412. 
Lincoln. Ranulph de Blondevillc, Earl 

of, 403. 
Lincoln College, Oxford, 361. 
Lincoln's Inn Hall, 14. 
Lindsay, Aims, 463 ; Motto, 283. 
Lindsay. Sir Alexander ; Crest, 265. 
Lindsay, Sir David ; Crest, 265. 
Lindsay, David, Earl of Crawford, 279. 
Lion, Heraldry of, 56 : early and present 

French Blazon of. 57, 487 ; Dxawing 

of. 61. 450; fine Examples, 450; 

burlesque Examples. 375, 450 ; Treat- 
ment of in Foreign Horaldiy, 466. 



Lion of England, 58, unchanged. 469 ; 
the Dexter Supporter ot 58. 302. 303, 
331 ; the Crest of, 266. 331. 

Lion of Scoilimd, 58, 298 ; Supporters of, 
302. 414 : Crest of, 332, 414, 415 ; on 
Tiles, 487. 

Lion, Couchant or Dormant, 59 ; Cow- 
ard. 59; Double-Tailed, or Queue 
Fourchee, 60; Issuiint or Nalssant, 
60; Paasant. 57; Passant Guurdant, 
58 ; Passant Retrardant, 58 ; Rxuupant, 
58; Rampant Riguardant. 58; Sa- 
lient. 58; Sejant, 59; Sejant Ram- 
pant. 59; Statant. 59; Statant 
Guaidant, 59 ; Vigilant, 60 ; Vorant, 
60; Winged. 60. 

Uon of Leon. 490. 

Lion Leopard, 57 ; Leoparde, 57, 487. 

Lion's Face, 59; Jambe, G^mbe, 59; 
Head, 59; Paw, .59. 

Lions Combatant. 58 : Counter-Passant, 
60 ; Counter-Rampant, 60. 

Lion. Lyon, the Lord ; the King-of-Anns 
of Scotland, 111,365. 

Lion or Lyon Office of Scotland, 365. 

Lioncel, 60. 

Lionel Plantagenet, K.G.. Duke of Cla* 
rence : Arms, 237; Coronet, 103. 

Lined, 85. 

Li^le, Lisle, De : Arms, 458 ; Effigy 
and Shield, 213. 

Lisle, Arthur. Viscount, 437. 

Lisle, the Baron, 49. 

Lists, 114. 

Litchfield, the Bishop and See, 359. 

Lithuania : Arms, 474. 

Little Brodley, 370. 

Little Crtsterton. Bms at. 336. 

Little Easton, Brass at, 105. 115. 339, 
394. 

Little Horkesley, Brass at, 182. 

Livery Colours, 114, 129, 437. 

Llandaff, the Bishop and See of, 49, 359. 

Llanover, the Baron, 45. 

Llanthony Abbey, 186. 

Loilged, 62, 85. 

London, the Bishop and See of, 53, 96. 

London, the City of: Arms, 53» 365; 
Crest, 365; Supporters, 366; Motto, 
366; Examples. 366. 

London, Church of All Hallows, Bark- 
ing. 369. 370. 

London, Church of St. Andrew Under- 
shaft, 369. 

London, Church of St. Helen, 339. 

Loudon, Church of St Martin Out- 
wich, 869. 

London. Society of Antiquaries of. 365. 

London. Royal Society of, 365. 

London, Fraternity of the Trinity Hoa«e 
of, 366. 



INDEX. 



531 



London, the Guildhall, 366. 
Long, Walter, Esquire : Crest, 272. 
Long Melford, Brass at, 211. 
Longesp^, Willitun. See William. 
Longespee, Ela, Countess of Salisbuiy : 

Seal. 403. 
Longespee, E. de, 22.3. 
Longespto, Label of, 224. 
Longueville, the Duke of, 435. 
Loneucville, the Count of, 228. 
Lord Lyon, Lord Liun, King-of-Anns 

of ScotUnd, 111,365. 
Lorn : Arms, 462. 
Lorn, Lords of, 46. 
Lorraine : Arms, 308 ; Quarterly with 

Bourchier, 226 ; Achievement of, 468, 

471. 
Lorraine, Alianore de, 226. 
Lorton, The Viscount, 58. 
Lothian, The Earl of, 193, 215, 223. 
Lothian, The Marquess of, 71. 
Louel, Richard, 182. 
Louis VIL of France. 73. 
Louis VIII. of France, 73. 
Louis, the Dauphin; Seal, 78, 404, 405. 
Louis of Bourbon : Seal, 413. 
Louisa, H11.H., the Princess, 252, 831. 
Louise de Savoye, Duchess D^Angou- 

Idme : Lozenge of Arms, 468. 
Louterell, Louttrel, Louterel, Lot'rel : 

Arms, 460; Ptttlter. 287. 
Louterell, Sir Andrew, 187. 
Louterell, Sir Geoffrey. 187; Crest, 266. 
Louvaine, Loveyne, Louvayne, 194, 306. 
Lovell, Level, Louell, Sir John, 72, 

223. 
Lovell, Sir Thomas, 205. 
Lovell. Sir William, 224. 
Lozenge, 33, 46. 
Lozenge of Arms, 137, 145, 394. 895 ; 

Superseded, 454. 
Lozengy, 35, 85. 
Lucies, 66, 125. 

Lucy, De : Arms, 125, 458 ; Bebos, 125. 
Lucy, Reynold, 225. 
Lullingstone, 124. 
Lunenburgh, 313b 
Lure, 46. 

liUsignan, the Counts, 188. 
Lnsignan, Hugh de, 405. 
Lusignan, Muud de, 405. 
Luton, the Confessor's Aims at, 126. 
Luttrell : Rebus, 123. See LonteielL 
Luxemburg, Peter, Count of, 308. 
Lyhart, Walter, Bishop of Norwich: 

Rebus, 123. 
Lymphad, 46, 462. 
Lynaeshaye, Sir Felip de. 485. 
Lyndeshaye, Sir Simon. 212. 
Lysle. John, K.G., Lord : Crest, 270. 
Lyttelton, the Banm, 68. 



Macaulay, The Baron, 46L 

Macdonald, The Baron, 63. 

Macdonald : B;ulge. 263. 

Macdonald, of Loni, 46. 

Mac.rrpgor : Badge, 263. 

Miic Williams : Arms, 309. 

Magdalen College, Oxford, 361. 

Magdalen College, Cambridge, 363. 

Magdeburgh : Arms, 312. 

M&gt;igna Ctiarta, sealed, 398. 

Maiden's Head and Rose, Badge, 305. 

Maintenanoe, Cap of, 114. 

Major Henniker : Motto, 283. 

Male Gryphon, 67. 

Malmains, Malemaynes : Arms, 409, 
485. 

Malmsbury, The Earl of, 63. 

Maltese Cro8S, 28. 

Maltravers : Arms, 415, 460. 

Manche, Maunche. 46. 

Manchester, the Bidhop and See of, 359. 

Manchester, The Duke of. 67. 

Mandeville. De : Arms, 458. 

Mandeville. Geoffiej de, Earl of Essex, 
41. 

Maned, 85. 

Manners, Ancient, 460. 

Manners, Thomas. K.G., First Earl of 
Rutland ; his Augmented Arms, 434. 

Manners, Duke of Eutknd : Arms, 462. 

Manny, Sir Walter, 153. 

Mans, EnameUed Tablet at, 383. 

Mantel^e, 85. 

Mantle, 114, 488. 

Mantling, Mantlings, or Lamhveqnins, 
109,115,171; Foreign, 468. 

Mar : Arms, 415. 

March, The Earl : Crest, 274. See Mor- 
timer. 

Marchioness, 117* 

Marchmont, Scottish Herald, 112. 

Mareschal, Le : Arms, 162, 458. 

Margaret of Anjou, Queen Consort of 
Enghmd. 165, 307. 

Mar^ret Beaufort, Countess of Bich- 
mond, 164. 380, 391. 

Margaret de Clare, Countess of Cornwall, 
146,234. 

Margaret of Denmark, Queen Consort of 
Scothmd, 145, 283, 327. 

Margaret Douglas. Ooontesi of Lennox, 
163. 184, 386, 394. 

Margaret of France, Queen Consort of 
England, 147 ; her Seals, 152, 154, 
307,407. 

M ir^mret. Lady Manny. 153. 

Margaret Plantageoet, Countess of Pem- 
broke. 101. 

Maiigaret PlontageDet, Countess of Salis- 
bury, 386. 

Maigeria, of Hereford, 154. 

2h2 



"532 



INDEX. 



Marks of Codeney, their Character and 
Use, 174; Early Examples, 199; 
Single. 200: Manhalling of. 144; 
Modem, 206. 

Marck : Arms. 313. 

Marlborough. John Churchill. Duke of; 
his Augmented Arms, 27. 435.443,462. 

Marlborough, the Duke of, quarters 
Despencer differenced, 192. 

Marmion, De : Arms, 310. 

Marmion. Bir Robert de. 267, 336. 

Marmion, Sir William de, 198. 

Mamy. William. 225. 

Marquess. Marquis ; his Bank. Style, and 
Title, IIG. 430; Coronet and Robes, 
117. 488 : Sons and Daughters, 117. 

Marshal, and Earl Marshal, of England, 
112, 235. 

Marshal, Maresohal, Le : Arms, 46. 

liarBhalling, 8, 117, 135, 138; of Acces- 
sories, 170 ; of two or more Shields, 
168 ; by Incorporation, 143. 145 ; by 
Quartering, 141 ; Recent and Present 
489; Foreign. 353, 467. 

Martel, Martell. 45. 47. 125. 

Martol, John de, 45. 125. 

Martlets. 65, 69; in Orlo. 187; as Dif- 
ferencing Ciiarges, 181, 186. 

Martyn, Judge, 43. 

Mary Tudor: Arms, 297; Supporters, 
802 ; Badge8,305 ; Armsof Consort.310. 

Manr Stuart : Aims, 298 ; Anns of the 
King, her Consort. 298. 

Mary of Burgnndy. 355. 

Maiy. the Princess. 251. 

Mary, H.RH. of Cambridge, 331. 

Maiy de Chastillon, Countess of Pem- 
broke, 362. 

Maiy d'Este, Queen Consort of England. 
311. 

Mary of Gueldres. Queen of James 11. of 
Sootiand: Seal. 163. 278. 

Biary of Modena. See D'Este. 

Maiy Stuart, Queen of Scotland : Sup- 
porters. 280, 302 ; Monument. 386. 

Masde. 32. 47 ; for Differencing, 196. 

Masoned 85. 

Mossyngberde. Sir Thomas and Lady. 
182, 336. 

Matilda, the Empn^s, 423. 

Matilda of Boulogne, Queen Consort of 
England. 306. 

Matilda of Flanders, Queen Consort of 
England, 306. 

Matilda of Scotland, Queen Consort of 
England. 306. 

Matilda de Samm. 154. 

Mauleyerer, Sir John. 262. 

Mauasabre, of Torraine : ArmS; 469. 

Maximilian, of Austria. 355. 

Maxworth Castle, 408. 



Mecklenburgh Strelitz : Arms. 812. 

Medals. 117, 352 ; Foreign, 353. 

Medjidie, Order and Insignia of the. 354. 

Meggenheim, Von : Arms, 467. 

Meissen : Arms, 313. 

Membered, 85. 

Menell, Hugh de, 224. 

Menell, Robert de, 224. 

Mercers' Company, 368. 

Merchants Aaventurers, 118, 367. 

Merchants Adventurers of Bristol, 368. 

Mercliant Tailors' Company. 369. 

Merchants' Marks, 117, 367. 

Merchants of the Staple, 118. 367. 

Mere, De la : Arms. 459. 

Mere, De la. Abbot Thomas. 8te 
Thomas. 

Mere?ale Abbey, Brass at, 72, 121, 267. 

Merley, De : Rebus, 125. 

Merley, Roger de. 187. 

Merlons, 80. 

Merlotte. Martlet, 65. 

Mermaid, 68, 261 ; on Seals of Berkeley?, 
278; "of the Sea," Badge of tl»e 
Black Prince, 335 ; Colkr of, 68, 335. 

Merman, 68. 

Morton College. Oxford. Brass at, 196; 
Arms, 360. 

Metals of Heraldry. 19, 117 ; their Pre- 
cedence, 20. 

Meynel, De : Arms, 213. 

Middle Base. 16. 

Middle Chief, 16. 

Middlesex : Arms. 51. 

MUl Rind. 47. 

MiU-stone, Cr^st. 270. 

Milo, of Gloucester and Hereford, 154; 
Anns. 155. 

Milton. John : Arras, 461. 

Minden, 312. 

Minor Chaiges, their Origin and Pri- 
mary Use, 177; introduced fi» Ca- 
dency or Differencing, 177. 

Misericorde, 43. 

Mitre^ 47, 90, 118; of Archbiahops and 
Bishops of Durham, 119. 

Modena, Mary of : Arms. 311. 

Modem Heraldry, 439. See Heraldry, 
Modem. 

Modem Heraldry, Differences of. 206. 

MoeUes, R. de, 184. 

Mohun, Philippa de, Dndheas of York. 
243. 459. 

Molesworth, Arms, 229. 

Moline, 47, 125. 

Molines, De : Arms, 47. 125. 

Molineux, Sir William. 338. 

Molyneux : Arms, 47, 125. 

Monasteries, Arms. 860. 

Monobesney, William de, 51 ; Aims, 198. 

Mondet, Von, of Burgundy, 469. 



1NI&gt;£X. 



533 



Mouemue, De, 213. 

Monogram, 120, 492. 

Monuments, Boyal, 383; of Boyal Per- 
soniiges, 384 ; iine Examples, 382. 

Monumental Heraldry, 380. 

Montacute, William de, " De Monte 
Acuto," Earl of Salisbury : Crest, spe- 
cially granted, 268 ; Seal, 412. 

Montacute : Differenced Arms, 175. 

Montague, Montagu : Arms, 64, 166. 

Montague, Sir Edward, 224. 

Montague, John, 216. 

Montague, Sir Symon de, the first Sub- 
ject to Quarter Arms, 160. 

Montague, Simon de, 160. 

Montague. William de, 160. 

Montagu, Mr. ; his able " Introduction 
to the Study of Heraldry," 409. 

Montbourcliier : Arms, 44. 

Montbourehier, Bertram de, 215. 

Montault, " De Monte Alto :" Arms, 459. 

Montault, Sir Andrew de, 215. 

Montault, Emma de, 190. 

Montault, Meliccnt de ; Seal, 152, 189. 

Monteiigle, The Baron : Motto, 284. 

Monteney, Mountcney, Sir E., 187. 

Monteney, Sir John, 187, 202. 

Montibrt, De : Arms, 60, 459 ; Effigy, 183. 

Montfort, John de, Duke of Brittany ,166. 

Montfort, Simon de, Earl of Leicester, 
288. 

Montgomerie : Arms, 459. 

Monthermer: Arms 64, 166. 

Monthermer, Rauf de : Crest, 267. 

Montmorency : Arms, 64, 214. 

Montrose, the Duke of : Arms, 462 ; 
Supporters, 280. 

Moon, in Complement or Plenitude, 71. 

Miirglin : Arms, 467. 

Morion, 45, 47. 

Momington, The Earl of, 207. 

Morse. 47. 

Mortier, 47, 

Mortimer, "De Mortuo Mari": Aims, 
31, 51. 175. 

Mortimer : Panache Crest, 121, 267,271. 

Mortimer : Seal, 409. 

Mortimer, Anne de, 243. 

Mortuncr, Beatrice de, 409. 

Mortimer, Edmund de : Seal, 271, 287. 

Mortimer, Hugh de, 175. 

Mortimer, John de, 175. 

Mortimer, Rauf de, 459. 

Mortimer, Roger de, 175. 

Mortimer's Cross, Battle oC 75. 

Motto, Mottoes, 120, 181; Examples, 
282; of England, 304; of Royal 
Personages, 305 ; of Garter, 341 ; of- 
Thistle, 345 ; of St. Patrick, 346 ; of 
Bath, 350; of St. Michael and St. 
George, 351 ; of the Star of India, 352. 



Moule, Mr. ; his excellent Work, ** He- 
raldry of Fish," 66, 269, 456. 

Moule, Miss Barbara; her admirable 
Heraldic Drawings, 456. 

Moulton, of Gilsland, 175. 

Moulton, of Frankton, 175. 

Mound, 120. 

Mounpynzon, Mompesson, 201. 

Mount, 47. 

Mounted, 85. 

Mowbray : Arms, 112, 153; Crest, 273 ; 
Badge, 262. 

Mowbray, John, K.G., Duke of Norfolk, 
153, 266. 

Mowbray, Thomas, K.G., Duke of Nor- 
folk, Earl of Nottingham, 127, 132, 
152,258.433; Crest, 273. 

Moyne : Crest, 269. 

Much Hadham, Brass at, 366. 

Mulberry Tree : Badge, 262. 

Mullet, 47, 486; fur Differencing, 183. 

Multon : Arms, 459. 

Mundulgas Nutlioobhoy : Arms, Crest, 
Motto, 371, 446. 

Municipal Corporations, 365» 

Muraill^ Walled, 85. 

Murray : Badge, 263. 

Murray, Sir Andrew, 217. 

Muscamp : Arms, 66. 

Musical Lines, as a Charge, 442. 

Naiant, 85. 

Nail, 311. 

Nalsunt, Issuanf, 85. 

Naples : Arms, 307. 

Napoleon UI., Emperor, 4, 354 ; Arms, 

470; Eagle, 469. 
Natural Objects, in Blazon, 70. 
Navarre, Ancient, 306 ; Modem, 41, 306, 

486. 
Navarre, Berengaria of. Queen Consort 

of England, 306. 
Navarre, Joanne of. Queen Consort of 

England, 307. 
Navarre, Sancho, *' the Strong," King of, 
' 486. 

Neath Abbey. Arms, 42. 
Nebula, IS, 85. 
Nelond, Prior Thomas, 100. 
Nelson, Horatio, Viscount : Blazon of 

his Arms and Crests from the " Peer- 
age," 441 ; Supporters, 442. 
Nelson, The Earl, 99. 
^'ferved 85 

Nevill, be Nevyll : Early Anns, 204. 
Neville Ancient, 461, 481. 
Neville: Arms, 25, 166; Crest, 273; 

Supporters, 280. 
Neville, Early Seals, 220, 404, 458. 
Neville, Badges, 261, 262, 389 ; Motto, 



534 



INDKX. 



Neville, of Raby, Differenced Sluelds of, 

203. 
Neville, Anne, Queen Consort of Eng- 
land, 1()6, 308. 
Neville, Cecilia, DnchesB of York, 245. 
Neville, Isabelle, DnchesB of Clarence, 

246. 
Neville, of Salisbmy, lAbels of, 202. 
Neville, Lord Bergavenny, 203. 
Neville, GUbert de, 461. 
Neville, John, K.G., Lord Montagu and 

Duke of Northumberland, 169. 190, 

202. 
Neville, John de, 197. 
Neville, Lord Latymer, 203. 
Neville, Balph de, Earl of Westmorland, 

134, 264, 339; Cieet, 269; OoUar of 

88., 336. 
Neville, Sir Roger, 215. 
Neville, Robert de, Biahop of Durham, 

119. 
Neville, Robert de, 220. 
Newbureh : Arms, 166, 179. 
Newcastle, The Duke of, 462 ; Crest, 272. 
New CoUeffe, Oxford, 49, 361. 
Niches in Architecture, 376. 
Nicholas, Emperor of Russia, K.G., 

473. 
Nicholas, Sir Harris ; References to his 

able Heraldic Works, 416. 482, 483. 
Nichols, Mr. J. Gough ; his Suggestions 

as to the SS. Device, 337; ms able 

Paper on the Earldom of Salisbury, 

403. 
Ninth Son ; his Modem Difierenoe, 206. 
Noble (coin), 417. 
"Noble and Gentle Men of England," 

by Bfr. Shirley ; a useful Work, and 

well illustrated, 456. 
Norfolk : Badge, 262. 
Norfolk. John Mowbray, K.G.,Duke of; 

Seal, 153; Crest, 266. 
Norfolk, Thomas Mowbrav, K.G., Earl 

Marshal, and Duke of Norfolk ; his 

Augmented Arms, 127, 132, 258, 433 ; 

Crest. 273; 8601,152. 
Norfolk, Thomas, « de Brotherton." Earl 

of. 235. 
Norfolk, Howard, Duke of, Earl Mar- 
shal : Crest, 59 ; quarters Warrenne, 

79 ; Arms, 112, 168. 428, 432. 
"Norfolk Archaeology," Reference to, 

151. 
Norman Sliields, 14. 
Norroy King of Arms, 111, 120; Arms, 

865. 
Northesk.William Carnegie, Earl of, 436. 
North Mimms, Brass at, 48. 
Northwick, The Baron, 66. 
Northumberland, The Duke of, 59, 66. 
Norton Brize, 48, 185. 



Norway : Arms, 310, 478; Flags, 478. 
See Sweden. 

Norwich, the Bishop and See of, 218, 
359. 

Norwich Cathedral, 123. 

Norwich City : Arms, 366. 

Norwich, Churrh of St John, Madder- 
market, at, 367. 

** Notes and Queries," Reihrenoe to, 45, 
119, 298, 315. 

'* Nouveau Traits de Blazon," an excel- 
lent French Treatise on Heialdry, by 
M. Bouton, 470. 

Nova Scotia Baronets, 95 ; Badge, 95, 
121. 

Nowed, 85. 

Nuremberg : Anns, 312. 

Oak Branches, 74. 

Cakes : Arms, 74. 

Oak Leaves, Badge of Fitz- Alans, 839. 

Odingsels, Odingsells, Ida d', 407, 408. 

Odingsels, William d*, 184, 408. 

OiBcial Arms, 144. 

Official Heraldry, 357. 

Official Insignia marshalled* 171. 

Of the Field, Of the First, ftc, 10. 

Ogress, 48. 

Oittrich, Thomas, 185. 

Okstead : Arms, 74. 

Oldenbuif^h : Arms. 311. 

Oldham. Bishop: Arms, 861; Bebu8» 
123. 

Oliphant, Lord: Supporters, 280. 

Oliver Cromwell : Seal, 402. 

On Degrees, 28. 

Oppressed, 85. 

Or, 19, 21. 

Older of the Bath, 347. 

Order of the Dannebrog, 355. 

Order of the Garter, 340. 

Order of the Golden Fleece, 355. 

Order of the Mediidee, 354. 

Order of St Michael and St. George. 
350. 

Order of St Patrick, 345, 491. 

Order of the Star of India, 351. 

Order of the Thistle. 345. 

Order of the Victoria Crass, 353. 

Order of the White Elephant, 356. 

Orders of Knighthood, 114, 121, 333. 

Orders of Knighthood, Foreign, 353. 

Ordinaries and their Diminutives, 21. 48. 

Ordinary of Arms, 121; Mr. Rip- 
worth's, 489. 

OreiUer, 48. 

Oriel College, Oxford, 361. 

Orkney, the Earl of, 63. 

Orle, Urle, 31. 81, 133. 

Orleans, Due d* : Arms, 470. 

Ormonde, the Marquess of, 67^ 



INDEX. 



535 



Ostrich Feather, 72, 153. 239. 

Ostrich Feather Badge, 256 ; Legend of 
its Origin, 257; used by the Plan- 
tagenet Princes, 257; biorne by the 
Sons of Henry IV.. 259; by the 
Beauforts. 258 ; differenced, 257. 259 ; 
the three feathers grouped together. 
260; the Badge of the Prince of 
Wales, 259, 260, 323 ; charged on his 
"Shield of Peace," by the Black 
Prince. 257. 

Otter, Loutre, 125. 

Otway, Sir G. G., 68. 

Outram, Sir James, 100. 

Outtred. Sir Robert, 185. 

Over all. " Sur le tout," 85. 

Overt, 85. 

Oxford, the Bishop and the See of, 55, 
359. 

Oxford Cathedral, 49, 227. 

Oxford, Bishop, the Chancellor of the 
Garter. 342. 

Oxford University : Arms, S60. 

Oxford City: Anns. 366. 

Oxford, Earls of : Arma, 38. 

Oxford : Bosses of the Vaulting of the 
Divinity School, 120. 

Pache, De, Arms, 213. 

Padlock. 48. 

Pa^nharo, Sir Edmond de, 202. 

Faignel, John de : Banner, 176. 

Pftinters' Company andHaU, 370. 

Pale, 22. 48. 

Pale-wise, 85. 

PaU, 48. 

Pallet, 15. 23, 48. 

Palmer's Staff, Pilgrim's Staff, 4&amp; 

Paly. 86. 85. 

Paly Bendy, 85. 

Panache. 121 ; Panache Crest, 267. 

Panmure. The Eurl of. 217. 

Panther, Heraldic, 69. 

Papworth. Mr.; his excellent and 

valuable Ordinary of Arms, 489. 
Paris, Church of St Etienne dn Mont 

at. 467. 
Paris, Imperial Library at. 468. 
Parker, Sir G.. 99. 
Parr, Oatherine. Queen Consort of 

England, 310. 
Party, Parted, 85. 
Parys, Robert, 19a 
Paschal Lamb, 121. 
Pascuant. 85. 
Passant, 85. 
Passant Guardant, 85. 
Passant Repassant, 85. 
Passion, Emblems of the, 395. 
Ptetoral Stalin 48. 
Platonce, 49, 86. 



Patriarclial Cross, 28, 49. 

Pattee Form^, 29. 40. 

Pattee Fitchee, 49. 

Pauldron, 49. 

Pavnel, Sir Thomas de. 187. 

Paynel. Sir WiUiam de. 187. 

Peaches, 76. 

Peacock, Pawne, 64. 

Pean, 20. 121. 

Pears, 76. 

Pebmarsh. Brass at. 191. 

Peche. Pechie, Sir John de, 76, 124, 

202. 
Peche, Sir Robert, 224. 
Peer. 121. 
Peerage, 121; Examples of Modem 

Debased Heraldry from the, 441. 
Peeress in her own Right, 169. 
Peers* Robes. 488. 
Pegasus, 68. 
Pelham : Aims. 41 ; Augmented Aim^ 

434, 436. 462; Badge. 262; early 

Crest. 274. 
Pelham-Clinton, Duke of Newcastle: 

Anns, 462; Crests, 274. 
Pelican in Piety, 65. 
PeUet, 25, 49 : Pellett^, 86. 
Pembridge, Sir Richard, K.G., 267, 

343. 
Pembroke. Aymer De Valence, Earl of. 

See Valence. 
Pembroke, William de Valence, Earl of, 

See Valence. 
Pembroke, John de Hastings, Eari of. 

See Hastings. 
Pembroke, Lawrence de Hastinga, Earl 

of, 389. 
Pembroke, Jaspar Tudor, Earl ofl See 

Tudor. 
Pembroke, Herbert, Earl of, 60. 
Pendent. 86. 291. 
Penner and Inkhom, 49. 
Pennon, 121, 287; Pennoncelle. 122. 
Per, 86; Per Bend, 16. 
Per Chevron, 16. 
Per Cross, 16. 
Per Fesse, 16. 
Per Pale, 16, 36. 
Per Saltire, 16. 
Percy: Arms, 38, 459; Badge, 262; 

Crest, 273; Lion, 55; Motto, 283. 
Percy Monument in Beverley Minster, 

14, 38, 383. 
Per^y, Sir Henry : Seal, 310. 
Perient, Lady, 394. 
Perrott, Sir E. G., 76. 
Pescod, Walter. 75. 122. 
Peterborough, the Bisliop and Bee of. 859. 
Petre: Arms. 362. 
Peverell, Catherine, 411 ; Badge, 263, 

411. 



536 



INDKX. 



Peyton, Joka de, 204. 

Peyvpe, Peyver, John de, 190. 

Peyvre, lUier de, 190. 

Peyvre, WUliam de, 190. 

Pheon, 49. 

PhUip " the Good," of Burgundy, 855. 

Philip IV., of France, 158. 

Piiilip, of Spain, 310. 

Philip. Sir William, K.G., 202, 267, 

336 ; his fine Effigy, 344. 
Philippa, of Haioault^ Queen Consort of 

England : Arms, 807, 409, 490 : Seal, 

159, 160 ; uses Ostrich Feather Badge, 

257 ; her Monument, 159, 161, 382, 387. 
Pickaxe, Pic, 49. 
Pickering, Thomas de, 215. 
Pickworth de : Arms, 49. 
Pictorial Heraldry, 441. 
Pierced, 86. i 

Pile,24; Pily,86. ' 

Pillow. 43, 50. 

Pily Bendy, 86. i 

Pitcher, 50. I 

Pitt : Arms, 463. 
Pius IX., 219. 
Planch^ Mr., Rouge Croix Pursuiyant, ' 

72, 149, 154. 186, 196, 245, 261,276, 

337. 
Plantagenet, the Surname, 230. i 

Plantagenet, Geoffrey, of Anjou, 122, 
Plantagenet, the last, 246. 
Plant^net Princes : Badges, 72, 75, 76, 

256-259, 303-305; Aims, 234-247. 

295-297; Supporters, 302; Crowns, 

316-319; Coins, 417. 
Planta Genista, 74, 122, 303. 
Plasterers' Company, 370. 
Plate, 25, 50; Platte, 86. 
Plate. Marks of, 57. 257. 
Playing Tables, 50. 
Pleissen : Arms, 313. 
Fleshy College, Seal, 261. 
Plessis, John de, 196. 
Plompton : Arms, 192. 
Plumes of Feathers, 121. 
Pods of Beans. &amp;c., 75. 
Poictou : Arms, 146. 
Pointed Cross, 28. 

Points of a Label. 50, 455. See Label. 
Poland : Arms, 474. 
Pole, I&gt;e la : Arms, 460 ; Quartered by 

Neville, 202; Crest, 269. 
Pole, John de la : K.G., Duke of Suffolk, 

103, 108, 167, 344 ; Monument, 386. 
Pole : Arms, 463. 
Pole, Sir Richard, 65, 274. 
Pomegranate, 308 ; and Rose, 305. 
Pomelled,JB6. 
Pomerania : Arms, 312. 
Pomme, 25, 50. 
Pommec, 50. 



Ponsonby, 42. 

Ponthieu : Arms, 306. 

Pope, Sir Thomas, Founder of Trinity 

College, Oxford, 362. 
Popinjay, 65. 
Portcullis, 50. 
Poitcullis : Badge, 261, 305 : Pendent to 

Collar of 8S., 337. 
Portcullis; Puisuivant, 111. 
Portugal: Arms, 311, 477; Supportera, 

Standard, and Ensign, 477. 
Portugal, Beatrice of, Countess of Arun- 
del and Suney : Seal, 477, 480. 
Postage-stamps, Foreign, 468, 487. 
Potenhall, John de, 193. 
Potent, 20, 122. 
Poulett, The Earl, 53. 
Powdered, Poudr^, 12. 86, 122. 
Pownder, Thomas, 118, 149. 
Powys, Powis: Arms, 163; Quarterly 

with Holland, 144. 
Poynings : Arms, 460. 
Poynings, Sir Nicholas de, 212. 
Precedence, the Older of, 428-431 ; of 

Women, 431. 
Pri'uervation of early Heraldic Relics and 

Authorities, as opiM^scd to " Restora- 
tion " of them, 391. 
Prester John, 358. 
Prestwych, Dean, 65. 
Preying, 89. 
Prince Consoi-t, H.R.H. Albert, the late : 

the Marshnlllug of his Anns^ 167; 

Arms, Crest, Sup]X)rtcrs, Coronet, and 

Motto, 314, 321. 
Preshaw House, Hampshire, 272. 
Prhices : Coronets. See Royal Cadency. 
Princes of Wales. See Wales. 
Prince ofWale8,H.R.H. the. SeeAlheti 

Edward. 
Princess of Wales. See Wales. 
Princesses : Arms, 207 ; Cadency, 253 : 

Coronets, 322. 
Princesses Royal. 251, 252, 331. 
Principality of Wales: Arms, 250, 324 : 

Ma»halled in the First Quarter of 

the Shield, bearing the ** Arms of tlm 

Second Order" of H.R.H. the Priniv 

of Wales, 324,325. 
Proper, 20. 
Provence, Alianoro ot. The Quetfii. 

306. 
Prussia : Arms, 331, 472 ; Supporters, 

Crown, Royal Stimdard, and National 

Flag, 472, 473. 
Pryck Spur, 52. 
Pseudo-Heralds, 443. 
Public Institutions : Arms, 3t&gt;5. 
Public Schools : Arms, 364. 
Pulham Churt'h, Norfolk, 75. 76. 
Purfled, 86. 



INDEX. 



537 



Purpure, 19, 122; early Examples of 
this Tincture, 485; sometimes as- 
signed to the Lion of Leon, 490. 

Purse, 50. 

Pursuivants, 111, 112. 

Pursuivants of Scotland, 112. 

" Pursuivant of Arms," a valuable and 
useful Work, by Mr. Planch^, 261. 

Quadrate, 50. 

Quarter, 31, 50. See Canton. 

Quarter Pierced, 22, 50. 

Quartered Shields, 141, 163; without 
Quartering Lines, 159, 253, 455. 

Quartering. 122 ; Examples of, 161 ; De- 
velopment of, 156 ; Examples of de- 
velopment, 156. 

Quartering Bordure, and Treasure, 144. 

Quartering in Foreign Heraldry, 466. 

Quurteriugs, 123, 157. 

Quarterly, 16, 86; Quarterly of Eight, 
&amp;c., 16. 

Quarterly Quartered, 16. 

Quarterly Quartering, 142, 157. 

Quarterly Pierced, 29, 50. 

Quatrefoil, 50. 

Queen, U.M. The, 108, 156 : Cadency of 
her Family, 252; her Crown, 320; 
Boyal Aciiievement of her Arms, 331. 

Queen's College, Oxford, 361 ; Seal and 
Arms of. 409. 

Queen's College, Cambridge, 363. 

Queue-Fourehee, 86. 

QuiUed, 86. 

Quincey, Rol)ert de, 219 ; Bogcr de, his ' 
Seal, 197, 404 ; Saer de, 219. 

Quintefoil, 42. 

Rachccourte, Sir Theobald, 190. 

Badcliffe : Arms, 364, 460. 

Badiant, Rayonnte, 86. 

Bagulee, Raguly, 18, 86. 

Bainbow, 50. 

Ram, HcJtddic 123, 125, 451, 452. 

Rampant, 86. 

Rampant Sijunt, 86. 

Rampton, Effigy at, 214. 

Ramryge, Thomas, Abbot of St Al ban's : 
Rebus, 123 ; his Monumental Chantry 
in the Abbey Church of St. Alban, 
279, 452 ; its excellent Heraldic Art, 
453; Feather Badge in it, 260; 
Shields of Arms in it, 454, 455. 

Ramsey : Rebus, 125. 

Rapier, 50. 

Ratzburgh: Arms, 312. 

Raven, 125. 

Ravensbergh : Arms, 314. 

Raymond, of Provence, 15. 

Rays of the Sun, 50. 

Razco. 86. 



Rebated, 86. 

Rebus, 123. 

Recercelee, 50, 79. 

Red Dragon, Badge, 305, 306. 

Reflected, Keflexed, 86, 303. 

** Regal Heraldry," a valuable Work, by 
Mr. Willement, 312, 325. 

Regalia, 125, 313. 

Regenstein : Arms, 313. 

Reguardaut, 86. ' 

Reindeer, 63. 

Removed, 86. 

Renfrew, The Baron, 322. 

Bepeatod Charges, 11, 178. 

Beptiles, Heraldic, 63. 

Besoun, Sir John de, 201. 

Best, 50. 

Bestoration of early heraldic Belies and 
Authorities, as opposed to the Preser- 
vation of them, 391. 

Betorted, 86. 

Bhine, the Counts Palatine of the, 477. 

Btal, 417. 

Biband, 23, 51. 

Bibbon of tlie Bath, 349 ; of the Garter, 
342 ; of St Michael and St. George, 
351 ; of St. Patrick, ai6; of the Star 
of India, 352 ; of the Thistle, 345. 

Bibbons of Honour, 352. 

Bichard I. : Arms, 5^, 295 ; as Count of 
Aquitaine, 294 ; Badges, 304 ; Crest, 
266; Crown, 315; Second Great Seal, 
266, 295, 401 ; Arms of Consort, 306; 
Monumental Effigies, 383. 

Bichard U. : Arms, 295, 296 ; his Shield 
impaling the Arms of the Confessor, 
166, 296, 409 ; Badges, 304, 356, 432 ; 
Badges and Shieldfs in Westminster 
Hall. 263, 378, 454, 490 ; Bamier. 288 ; 
imputed Supporters, 302 ; Great Seal, 
296, 401 ; Arms of Consorts, 166. 307 ; 
Monument and Effigy in Westminster 
Abbey, 38, 74, 122, 384. 

Bichard U., his Grants of Augmenta- 
tions, 126, 434. 

Bichard U.. before hisAcoession, 222, 241 . 

Bichard UL : Arms, 297 ; Impaled with 
the Arms of his Consort, 166 ; Badges, 
305 ; Supporters, 302 ; Arms of Con- 
sort, 166, 308. 

Bichard III., before his Accession, as 
Duke of Gloucester, 246. 

Bichard, Earl of Cornwall and Emperor, 
33, 64, 214, 234 ; Supporter, 277. 

Bichard Plantagenet, "of Coningsburgh," 
Earl of Cambridge : Arms, 243, 393 ; 
Arms of Consort, 243. 

Bichard Plantagenet, K.Ci., Earl of 
Cambridge ami Butland, and Third 
Duke of Y&lt;irk : Anus, 24.1; Arms of 
Consort, 24,*). 



538 



INDEI. 



Bichard Plantagenet, K.G., Fifth Dnke 
of York, Duke of Norfolk and Wai&gt; 
renne, and Earl of Nottingham : Arms, 
246. 

Richmond, Edmund Tudor, ''of Had- 
ham," Earl.of, 249. 

Bichmond, Heniy Tudor, Earl of. See 
Henry VII. 

Richmond, John de Droux, Count of 
Brittany, and Earl of, 34, 153, 208, 
214. 

Richmond, John Plantagenet, K.G., 
Earl of. 244. 

Bichmond, the Duke of, 273, 281, 438. 

Bichmond, Do, 213. 

Bichmond Herald, 111. 

Bipon, the Bishop and See of, 359. 

Bishanglea, Biaas at, 185. 

BiBing, Bouatiant, 86. 

Biv^re, Nicholas de, 215. 

Bivers, John de, 197. 

BiverB, Bichard Widville, K.G., Earl, 
116, 244. 

Bobaart, Louis or Ludovick, K.G., Loird 
Bourehier, 54; Crest, 270; Monu- 
ment, 383, 394. 

Bobertson: Badge, 263. 

Booelane, Booelyn : Arms, 41. 

Bochefoucault, Count de, 188. 

Bochester, the Bishop and Bee of, 359. 

Boehfort, Bochefort, De : Anns, 163, 
309. 

Bochfort, John de, 215, 216. 

Bochfort, Bauf de, 215, 216. 

Boet, Boett : Anus, 393 ; Crest, 271. 

Bokeby : Arms, 460. 

Bokele, Bichard de, 197. 

Bokewoode, 42. 

Bolls of Arms, 125, 481, 482; the he- 
raldic Terms employed in them, 483. 

BoU of Caerlaverodc or CarlaTerock, 93, 
481 ; Banners of Saints described in 
it, 127; Banner of Henry, Earl of 
Lincoln, described in it, 288, 485 ; 
Boll of the Bannerets present with 
the King, 487; l^Ir. Wright's new 
Translation and Edition, 287, 487. 

Bomare III., William de, Earl of Lin- 
coln : Seal, 196, 403. 

Bompu, 86. 

BoBe, of Heraldry, 75; Boyal Badge, 
260, 303; for Differencing, 193; in 
Modem Cadency, 206; of England. 75, 
.332 ; of Lancaster, 75, 304 ; of York, 
75, 304, 305; en Soleil, 75. 339; and 
Arrows, 305 ; and Thistle, 305. 

Bose Noble (coin), 417. 

Bozon, Du, of Bretagne : Arms, 469. 

Bos, De, the Baron, 54. 

Bos, WUliam de, 176. 

Boss, or Boos : Arms, 176. 415. 



Boas, of Kendall, 310. 
Boss, Scottish Herald, 112. 
Bostock : Arms, 312. 
Bothsay, the Duke of, 322, 323. 
Bothsay. Scottish Herald, 112. 
BoueUe Spur, 52. 486. 
Bouen, Effigy of Bichard I. at, 383. 
Bouge Croix, Pursuivant, 111, 126. 
Bouge Dragon, Pursuivant, 111, 126. 
Bouiidle, Boudelet, 21, 24, 51 ; for Dif- 
ferencing, 195. 
Bous Boll, in the College of Aims, 490. 
Bouthe, Piers de : Aims, 483. 
Boyal Artillery : Motto, 371. 
Boyal Banners, 300. 
Boyal Cadency. 206, 230-255. 
Boyal Cadency of France, 470. 
Boyal Consorts : Arms, 306-315. 
Boyal Family, Oadeocy of the present, 

251. 
Boyal Marines : Motto, 371. 
Boyal Monuments of England, 383-386, 

388, 390-394. 
BoYid Personages; their Arms Mar^ 

dialled, 168; their Arms Blaioned, 

293-300. 
Boyal Personages; their MoDuments, 

384. 
Boyal'Seals, 398, 400, 407. 
Boyal Signature, the earliest known, 

.398. 
Boyal Society of London : Anns, 365. 
Boyal Supporters, 275,301-303; of Soot- 

land, 280, 415. 
Budder of a Ship, as a Cham, 261. 
Bue, Chaplet of, 314. See Cbtncelin. 
Budsell, Duke of Bedford : Arms, 462; 

Crest, 63, 66; Motto, 283. 
Bussia: Arms, 473; National Flags, 

473 ; Naval Flags, 474 ; the Czar, as 

Successor to the Ciesais, 473. 
Bussia Merchants, 368. 
Bustochen, Die, of Pomerania: Aims, 

467. 
Bustre, 33, 51. 
Ruthven, William, 279. 
Butland, Edward Plantagenet, Earl of. 

iSee Edward. 
Butlaud, Bichard Plantagenet, Earl ot 

See Richard. 
Butland, the Duke of: Anns, 64, 68, 

462 ; Crest, 272. 
Butland, Thomas Mannets, K.G., First 

Earl of, 434. 
Bytiier, Sir William de, 193. 
Byther, William de, 71, 193. 

Sable, 19, 126. 

Sacred Emblems and Symbols, 395. 
Sagittarius, Sagittary, Centaur, 67, 
294. 



INDEX. 



539 



Sails of AnnB, HenJdic Sails, 288, 412. 

St. Alhan, 126. 

St. Alban, Abbey Church of, 38, 68, 
123, 339 : Anns, 860, 451 ; Chantries 
of Abbots Wheathampstede and Ram- 
ryge at, 379. 383, 396, 452-454; 
Heraldry of, 377; Monuments at, 
385, 413. 414; Heraldic Glass at, 
218,237,239. 

St. Alban's, " the Boke" of, 199. 

St. Alban's, the Duke of, 438. 

St. Andrew : Cross, 27, 126. 

St. Anthony : Cross, 27, 53 ; Order of, 
335. 

St Amaud : Arms, 460. 

St. Amaud, Aumery de. 195, 212. 

St. Arnaud, Lord, 389. 

St AAaph, the Bisliop and See of, 359. 

St Cross, near Winchester, Brass at, 
395. 

St Cuthbert, of Durham, Banner, 287. 

St David's, the Bishop and See of, 359. 

St Edmund : Arms, 99, 126, 434. 

St Edward: Arms, 99, 126; Shield at 
Westminster, 186. See Confessor. 

St George: Arms, 99; Early Figures 
of, 889. 

St George, Chapel of; at Windsor, 129, 
340, 342 ; its Heraldry, 377. 

St. John, of Beverley : Banner, 287. 

St. John, Knights of, 28, 333. 

St John's College, Oxford : Arms, 362 ; 
impaled Shield of Charles I. and Hen- 
rietta Bluia at 311. 

St. John's College, Cambridge, 54, 123 ; 
Arms, 363; Heraldry of Gateway, 
378. 

St John : Early Seals, 405, 463 ; Badge, 
45. 

St. John, Agnes de, 226. 

St John, John de, 184. 

St. John, John de, the Younger, 223. 

St John, Roger de, 184. 

St. John of Sussex, 405, 463. 

St Leger : Arms, 409. 

St Leger, Thomas de, 202. 

St Michael, 128. 

St Michael and St George ; Order, In- 
signia, and Officers of, 350, 351. 

St Omcr : Arms, 194, 409. 

St Patrick : Cross, 27, 128. 

St. Patrick : Order, Insignia, and Officers 
of, 345, 346. 

St. Patrick s Cathedral, Dublin, Restora- 
tion o^ 490, 491. 

St. Paul, 53, 308. 

St. Paul's, Arms of Dean and Chapter 
of, 360. 

St. Peter, of York, Banner, 287. 

St Peter's Colh^ge, Oambri&lt;lgi\ 362. 

St Quintin : Arms, 151, 214. 



St Quintin, Robert de : Seal, 151. 

St Quintin, Sir Thomas de, 182, 270. 

St Stephen's Crown of Hungary, 472. 

Saintly Emblems, 287. 

Salamander, 68, 69. 

Salient, 86. 

Salisbury, the Bishop and See of, 55, 359. 

Salisbury Cathedral, 336, 338. 

Salisbury, Ela, Countess of, 403. 

Salisburv, Margaret Plantagenet, Coun- 
tess of, 386. 

Salisbury, William Longesp^, Earl of, 
60. feeWiUiam. 

Salisbury, William Montacute, Earl of: 
Seal, 412. 

Salisbury, the Nevilles, Earls of. See 
Neville. 

Salmon, 123. 

Salters* Company and Hall, 369. 

Saltire,24, 27, 51,455. 

Saltire-wiae, 86. 

Saltmarsh, De, 182. 

Sancho, " the Strong," King of Navane, 
486. 

Sanglier, 62. 

Sans, Sans Nombre, 87. 

Saroel^. 87. 

Sardinian War Medal, 3&amp;I. 

Savoy, Arms of Counts of, 477, 

Savoy, Arms of House of, 477. 

Sawbridgeworth, Brass at, 242, 387. 

Sawley Abbey, 49, 339. 

Sawtry, Brass at 269. 

Saxe^bnrg-Gotha : Arms and Sup- 
porters, 477. 

Saxony: Arms, 168, 314, 477. 

Saxony, Ancient, 314. 

Saxony, H.R.H., Albert Edward, Prince 
of Wales, Duke of, 322. 

Saxony, H.R.H., the late Prince Consort, 
Duke of. See Albert 

Saxony : Arms, Cast of Early Shields of, 
at the Crystal Palace, 477. 

Say De : Arms, 458. 

Say, Sir John de, 132. 

Scaling Ladder, 51. 

Scarpe, 51. 

Schrotenegger, Die : Arms, 467. 

Schwerin County : Arms, 312. 

Schwerin Principality : Arms, 312. 

Scintillant, 87. 

Scotland : Arms, 32, 298; the lion of, 
58 : the Tressure of, 54. 144, 191, 298 ; 
Badges, 76, 332 ; Crest, 332, 415 ; Sup. 
porters, 302, 414. 

Scotland : Arms, dimidiated, 163 ; impal- 
ing Denmark on a Lozenge, 327 ; im- 
paling France Modem and England, 
393 ; impaling Gueldres and Flanders, 
147; impaling Beaufort on a Loienge, 
415. 



540 



IND£X. 



Boott. Sir Walter, of Abbotsfonl, 68, 461.- 

Soott, John. Earl of Eldon, 468. 

Soott, of ThirlBtane : Crest and Motto, 
283, 435. 

Scott, Thomas, Archbishop of York, 861. 

Scottish Augmentations, 435. 

"Scottish Heraldry," Mr. Seton's; its 
Excellence and Value, 415 ; References 
to, 217. 263, 275. 

Scottish Heralds, 112. 

Scottish Seals, 279, 414. 

ScroU and Motto, 171. 

Scrope: Arms, 210; Seven Differenced 
Shields of, 226. 

Scrope, Sir Heniy le, 225, 486. 

Scrope, Henry, 227 ; John, 227. 

Scrope, John, Lord, 267 ; Crest, 121, 419. 

Scrope, Richard le, 224 ; Stephen, 227. 

Scrope, Richard, Lord, of Bolton, 216. 

Scrope, Tiiomafl, 227 ; William le, 225, 
486. 

Scrope and Grosveuor Controversy, 216. 

Scudamore, 52. 

Seafleld, The Earl of, 100. 

Seagrave, John : Seal, 278. 

Seal, Brass at, 269. 

Seal-Heraldry, 400. 

Seals, Heraldry of, 397 ; introduced into 
England, 397 ; Forms, 898 ; General 
Description, 398 ; Classification, 399 ; 
Study of, 399 ; Great Seals, 294-296, 
399, 400; Impressions protected by 
" Fenders," 399 ; various Classes, 399, 
400; Delight of Early Heralds in 
them, 400; Heraldic Qualities and 
Characteristics, 400; charged with 
several Shields, 150, 406; charged 
with Mounted Effigies, 411; with 
Banners, 410; with Shipping 412, 
418 ; Supporters first used in them, 
403; early Examples, 277, 404, 405; 
Scottish, 279, 414 ; Laing's Catalogue 
of Ancient Scottish, 880, 456, 491. 

Sea-Lion, 68. 

Seax,51. 

Second Son ; his Modem Difference, 206. 

Second Title, 98, 128. 

Rcx'retum, Secreta, 399. 

Seeds of Plants, &amp;c., 76 ; Seeded, 87. 

Sefton, Brass at, 388. 

Sejrrave : Arms, 158, 458. 

S&lt;&gt;grave, Sir Estevene de, 201, 211. 

Segrave, Sir Henry de, 211. 

Scgrave, John de, 223. 

Segrave, Sir Symon de, 211. 

Segreant, 87. 

Sejaut, 87. 

Seiant Addorsed, 87. 

Selby, Monument at, 45, 174. 

Selkirk, the Earl of, 68. 

Scmdo, 11,87, 178. 



Sergeoux, of Cornwall : Arms, 461. 

Seruse, Cerise, 51. 

Seton : Arms, 463. 

Seton, the Baron, 99. 

Seton, Mr. ; his admirable Wcnrk on 

Scottish Heraldry, 263, 275, 330, 415, 

456 ; on Heraldic Debasement, 442. 
Sevans, Sir Robert de, 43, 131, 282. 
Seventh Son: his Modem Difference, 

206. 
Sever, Warden Heniy, 196. 
Seymour, Jane, Queen Consort of 

England, 309. 
Shackle-Bolt, 51. 
ShaOed, 87. 
Shake-Fork, 51. 
Shakespt are : Rebus, 123 ; Aims and 

Crest, 52. 461 ; refers to Badges, 255 ; 

uses the term " Colours," 97. 
Shamrock, 75, 128 ; of Ireland, 332. 
Shastone. R. de, 184. 
Sheaf of Airows, 40, 261. 
Sheffield, Arms, 74. 
Shells, Heraldic, 66. 
Shield of Arms, 4. 
Shields, Heraldic ; their Varieties, Fom, 

their Parts, Points, and Primary 

Divisions, 12-17, 454 ; as Charges, 51. 
Shields of Pretence, Inescutcheons, 81, 

140; Examples, 167. 
Shields, Heraldic, in Architecture, 51, 

877. 
Shields, Heraldic, as Decorative Acces- 
sories, 52, 465. 
Shields, Heraldic, in Foreign Effigies, 

465. 
Shields, Heraldic, on Monuments, 51, 

386. 
Shillingford, Brassies at, 195. 
Ship, 52. 

Shipping on Seals, 412. 
Shirley, Mr.; his excellent Work. " Noble 

and Gentle Men of England," 456, 
Shovel, Sir Cloudisley: Augmented 

Arms, 485. 
Shrewsbury, John Talbot, K.G., ISeA of, 

282, 344. 
Shrewsbury, The Earl of, 63. 
Sicily : Anus, as quartered by Catherine 

of Anagon, 308 ; Arms Modem, 487 ; 

Postage Stamps of, 487. 
Sickle and Garb, Badge, 410, 411. 
Sidney : Arms, 864. 
Sidney Sussex College, Cambridge. 

864. 
Sigmaringen : Arms, 478. 
Signet Rings, 398. 
Siivestre de Petrasancta, introduces 

Sj^mbolization of Heraldic Tinctures, 

485. 
Simon, Thomas, the Soul Eugmvcr, 40*2. 



INDEX. 



541 



Single Marks of Cadency, 200, 204, 206. 
Single Supporter, 275. 277 ; in Scottish 

Heraldiy, 279 ; in Foreign Hemldry, 

468. 
Sinister, 16, 17, 128. 
Siradia, Province of Poland : Arma, 

467. 
Six-foil, 75. 

Sixth Son ; his Moderrf1[)ifference. 206. 
Skinners' Company and Hall, 369. 
Slater, Mr.; his Restoration of St. 

Patrick 8 Cathedral, Dublin, 491. 
Sleford, Canon John, 163, 387. 
Sleswick : Arms, 311. 
Slipped, 87. 
SmjEtll Charges, Sem^ or in Orle, 178 ; 

their numbers reduced, 178; borne 

single, 178. 200. 204. 
Smith, William, Bishop of Lincoln, 

361. 
Smythe, Sir William, 338. 
Snake, 66. 

Snowdon. Scottish Herald, 112. 
Soaring, 87. 
Society of Antiquaries of London : Arms, 

363. 
Somerset, Cliarles, Earl of Worcester, 

438. 
Somerset, John, Duke of, 199. 
Somerset, the Dukes of. 248; Sup- 
porters, 281. 
Somerset. Herald. 111. 
Sophia, the Princess. 251. 
Southacre, Brass at, 72, 115. 
Southwark, St Saviour's Church at, 

336. 461. 
"Soutiens, Lp8,'*468. 
Sovereign (Coin), 417. 
Spain : Arms, Supporters, Standard, and 

Ensign, 478. 
Spain, Philip of, 310. 
Spanish Inquisition : Arms, 465. 
Spear, 52, 123. 
Spencer, Henry. Arras, 192. 
Spencer, the f^l, 32, 192 ; Supporters, 

281. See Despencer. 
Spilsby, Brass at, 175, 176, 270. 
Springing, 87. 
Spur. 52 ; Varieties of, 52. See Mullet, 

and page 486. 
SS., Collar of, 128, 258. 337. 492 ; Sup- 
posed Origin, 337. See Collar. 
Stafford, Estafforde: Arms, 139. 460; 

Badges, 285; Canton, 209. 
Stafford, Edmund de, Bishop of Exeter, 

217. 
Stafford, Henry, Lord, 167. 205. 
Stafford, Humphrey, K.Q., 264, 269, 

336 ; Crest, 268 ; Garter-Plate, 264. 
Stafford, Jcmingham, Baron : Supporters, 

280. 



Stafford, John. Archbishop of Canter- 
bury, 217. 
Stafford, John Paul, Earl of. 285. 
Stafford, Nicholas de, 195. 
Stafford. Balph, Lord, 389. 
Stafford, Hobert de, 196, 212. 
Stafford Knot, 28, 285. 
Stag. 62. 

Staindrop, 264. 336. 
StaU Plates of Bath, 378; of Garter, 

378. 
Stalls of Knights of Bath, 350 ; of K.G., 

340 ; of Knights of St. Patrick, 491. 
Stamford, Grey, Earl of : Motto, 283. 
Standard. 93, 128, 289. 
Standard of Edward HI., of Henry of 

Bolingbroke, of the Earl of Warwick, 

of Henry VIU., of Elizabeth, 129, 

286, 289. 
Standon. Brass at, 82, 132. 366, 367. 
Stanhope, The Earl. 207. 
Stanley, Earl of Derby : Arms, 63, 273 ; 

Badge, 263; Crest, 273, 275; Sup- 
porters, 281. 
Stanley, Sir John, 205. 
Stanley, Henry, 335. 
Stanley, Thomas, Earl of Derby, 164. 
Stanton Haroouri, Effigies at, 108, 339, 

344. 
Staple, 52. 
Stapledon, Walter de. Bishop of Exeter 

217. 
Stapleton : Rebus, 52. 
Star, 71, 130. 

Star of India, Order of. 350. 
Stargard, Arms, 312. 
Stars of Orders : Bath, 348, 859 ; Garter, 

341 ; St. Michael and St George, 350 ; 

St. Patrick, 346; Star of India, 352 ; 

Thistle, 345. 
Statant, 87. 

Stationers' Company, 370. 
Steel Cap, 52. 
Stephen: Arms, 295; Badge, 67, 293, 

294 ; Arms of Consort, 306. 
Stettin : Arms, 312. 
Stirrup, 52. 

Stock of a Tree, 76, 304. 
Stoke Daubemon, 122. 
Stoke Lyne, Lord of the Manor of, 

275. 
Stormark : Arms, 311. 
Story, Richard : Arms, 204. 
Stourton, Loid : Crest, 269. 
Stradsett, Slab at, 189. 
Strange, Strannge, Estrange, L*EBtrange. 

See L'Estrange. 
Strange, John le, 212, 223. 
Strange, Le, of Blackmere, 175. 
Strange, Le. of Knocking. 175. 
Strathem, Euphemia, Countess of, 155. 



542 



INDEX. 



Strawberry Leavee, 74 ; of tlie Ducal 

Coronet, 101. 
Strevelyn, Sir John, 213. 
Stringetl, 46. 87. 
Strykeland, Wauter : Anna, 192. 
Stuart, The: Arms, 155, 463; Motto. 

283. 
Stuart, Alan, of Ochiltree, 155. 
Stuart, Alexander, Earl of Menteith, 

279. 
Stuart, Ambella, 423, 425. 
Stuart, Charles, Prinoe of Wales, 250. 
Stuart, Charles, Prinoe of Wales, 250. 
Stuart, David, 155. 
Stuart, Henry, Prince of Wales, 250, 

260. 
Stuart, James, Duke of York, 251. 
Stuart, Margaret, Countess of Anjou, 

279. 
Stuart, Maiy. Queen of Scotland, 386, 
Stuart , Mary, infant Daughterof James I. , 

395. 
Stuurt, William, Duke of Gloucester, 

251. 
Stuart, of Bonhill, 463. 
Stuart, of Cruxton. 217. 
Stuart, of Davingstone, 463. 
Sturmi, Esturmi : Arms, 309. 
Subordinarics, 31. 
Subverted, 87. 
Sudborough, Effigy at, 226. 
Sufflue, or Clarion, 42. 
Suffolk, Badge, 263. 
Suffolk, John de la Pole, K.G., Duke 

of. 108. 344. 
Suffolk, the Duchess oC her Effigy, 

344. 
Suleye. Sir William de, 224. 
Sun in Glory, or in Splendour, 71, 305. 
Suns and Koses, Yorkist Collar of, 130, 

338. See Collar. 
Super-Charge, 130. 
Supporters, Supporter, "Lea Supports," 

130, 171, 275, 468 ; their Origin, 277, 

490; Introduction, 276; By whom 

borne and how granted, 276; mar- 
shalled, 171; differenced, 171, 199, 

277; Examples, 280; Single, 275, 

277. 
Supporters of England, 331, 375. 
Supporters of Scothmd, 302, 414. 
Supporters of H.B.H. the late Prinoe 

Consort, 315. 
Supporters of H.B.H. the Prince of 

Wales, 322. 
Supporters of the Princes and Princesses 

of the Boyal Family, 331. 
Supporters, Boyal, of England, 301-303. 
Supporters, Scottish, 279, 280. 
Supporters in Foreign Heraldry, 468. 
SuTcoat, 113, 131. 



Surmounted, 87. 

Surrey, Thomas, Duke of, 247. 

Surrey, De Warrennes, Earis of. See 
Warrenne. 

Surteoii' " History of Durham," engrav- 
ings of Stab* in. 120, 418. 

Sur-tout, Sur le tout, 87 ; " Brochant sur 
le tout," 465 

Sussex, Augustus Frederick, K.G.. 
Duke of, 251. 

Sussex, St. John of: Seal, 405, 463. 

Sustained, Soutenn^, 87. 

Sutherland, Ancient, 281. 

Sutherland, the Duke of, 74, 462 ; Crest, 
273 : Supporters, 28. 

Sutherland, the Earls of, 462. 

Swan, 65; Badge of De Bohuns, 258, 
260. 277, 304 ; as Supporter. 254, 261, 
277, 409; in Standard of Henry IV., 
261 ; worn by John Gower, 336. 

Sweden and Norway : Arms, 310, 478 ; 
Supporters and Flags, 478. 

Sweden, Ancient, 478 ; Modem, 478. 

Switzerland : Arms, 479. 

Swivel, 53. 

Sword, 53. 

Swynebume ; Bebus, 125. 

Swynebume, Thomas. 182. 

Swynebume, William, 182. 

Swynforde, Catherine: Monument in 
Lincoln Cathedral, 337. 

Symbolization of Heraldic Tinctures. 
485. 

Tabaid, 112, 131. 

Talbot: Arms, 460. 

Talbot, John, K.G..Earlof Sbrewabmy, 

344. 
Talbot. Gilbert, Lord, 205, 216. 
Talbot quartering Neville, 205. 
Talbot Dog, 63. 

Tallow Chandlers' Company, 370. 
Tanfleld, 267. 

Tankerville. John, Earl of, 216. 
Taplow, Braas at, 66. 
Tappen, Die, 467. 
Target, 53. 
Tasselled, 87. 
Tatelow,De, 189. 
Tateshall, Bobert de, 208, 213. 
Tan Cross, 27, 53, 335. 
Taylboys, Wauter, 192. 
Ttazle, 76. 

Tederade, Peter : Seal, 150. 
Templars, Knights, 28, 120, 834. 
Templars, Barristers, 334, 
Temple : Motto of, 283. 
Temple Church, 14, 41, 54; Effigy at, 

176. 
Tenants, 275. 468. 
Tendringe, Sir John, 224. 



INDEX. 



543 



Terri, John, 118, 367. 

Teschen: Anns, 391. 

Tetlow, of Haughton : Arms, Crest, and 
Motto, 442, 443. 

Tewkcobuiy Abbey Church, 382. 

Thane, 94, 104. 

Thebes, Siege of, 13. 

Theddlethoi-pe, Brass at, 194. 

Third Son ; his Modern Difference, 206. 

Thistle, 76. 132. 

Thistle, Badge of Scotland, 332. 

Thistle, Order of the, 283, 345 ; Insignia 
and Officers, 345. 

Thomas, "de Brotherton," Earl of Nor- 
folk, Marshal of England, 153, 235, 
410. 

Thomas, Second Earl of Lancaster, 235. 

Thomad Plantagenet, -of Woodstock," 
K.G., Duke of Gloucester and Buck- 
ingham, Earl of Essex and Northamp- 
ton : Arms, 163, 241 ; Supporter, 277 ; 
Great Seal, 152, 403 ; Seals, 258, 277. 
409 ; Arms and Monument of Consort, 
162, 241, 384. 

Thomas Plantagenet, K.G., Second Duke 
of Clarence. 243, 437. 

Thorpe, Sir Edward de, 109, 267; Hehn, 
209 ; and his Lady, 336. 

Threstle, 53. 

Thuringia, Arms, 313. 

Thuringia Pf'alz, Arms, 313. 

Thurstan: Seal, 405. 

Tiered. 87. 

Tiger, Heraldic, 69. 

Tilting Spear, 53. 

Timbre, 132. 

Tinctures, 19, 20, 132. 

Tinctures, Symbolization of, 20, 485. 

Tiptoft, John, Earl of Worcester : Seal, 
278 

Tiptoft. Joice, Lady, 114. 144. 163 ; Braas 
fully described, 389. 

Tiptott, Sir John, 389. 

Tong, Brass at, 894. 

Toni, Tony. Bobert de, 197,459. 

Toolye, Henry, 149. 

Topclyiffe, De : Arms, 461. 

Topliif, Brass at, 461. 

Torch, 53. 

Torqued, 87. 

Torregiano, 391. 

Torse, 53. 

Torteau, Torteaux, 25, 53. 

Tortoise, 66. 

Toumee, 87. 

Tours, Eustace de, 223. 

Towered, 87. 

Tra&lt;ie Brands, 118. 

Transfixed, Transpierced, 87. 

Transfluent, 88. 

Transmuted, 88. 



Transposed, 88. 
Traversed, 88. 

Treatment, Heraldic, of Figures, De- 
vices, and Compositions, 448. 
Treflee. 53. 88. 
Trefoil, 76; slipped, 76 
Trej^os, Do, 213. 
Treille, Trellisc, 53. 
Tremain : Arras, 125. 
Trent, the River, 111. 
Tressell, 75 ; for this, read Fressell. 
Tressure, 32, 53; its first appearance, 

32; impaled, 32, 145, 163, 299; 

quartered, 144; adopted by the 

Stuarts, 155; borne for Augmentation, 

435, 463. 
Tricked, 88. 

Tricolour of France, 470. 
Tricorporate, 88. 
Trinity College, Oxford : Arms and 

Crest, 362. 
Tiinity College, Cambridge; Arms, 363. 
Trinity Hall, Cambridge : Arms, 363. 
Trinity House, London : Ensign, 52 ; 

Arms and Crest, 366. 
Tripping, Trippant, 62, 88. 
Triton. 68. 
Trononee, 88. 

Trotton, Brass at, 52, 107, 336. 
Trumpet, 54,125. 
Trumpingdon, Brass at, 181. 
Trumpingdon, Sir Giles de, 181. 
Trumpingdon, Sir Roger de, 54, 109, 

125, 181. 
Truncheon, 132. 
Trunked, 88. 
Trussed, Trussing, 88. 
TrusseU, Sir Wanen, 195. 
Tudors, Cadency of the, 249 ; Badge, 

50; Colours, 114. 129; Roses, 76. 

a38; Shields of, 378; Standaixls. 129. 
Tudor, Arthur. K.G., Prince of Wales, 

59. 249; Seals, 259, 414; his Monu- 
ment in Worcester Cathedral, 40, 75, 

260,261,386. 
Tudor. Edmund, « of Hadham," £^1 of 

Richmond, 249. 
Tudor, Edward, nominally Prince of 

Wales, 250. 
Tudor, Henry, Earl of Richmond, 249. 

See Henry VII. 
Tudor, Henry, Duke of York and 

Prince of Wales, 249, 250. See 

Henry VIII. 
Tudor, Jaspar, K.G., Earl of Pembroke 

and Duke of Bedlbid, 249 : Seals, 

412. 413. 
Tun, 54. 

Turkey: Arms and Flag, 479. 
Tyndall : Crests. 272. 
'I^es,62. 



544 



INDKX. 



Ufford, D' : Aims, 460. 

Ughtred, Sir Thomas, 185. 

Ulrick, K.G., Duke of Holstein. 475. 

Ulster King-of-Aims, 50, 111; Arms, 

365. 
Ulster : Badge, 56, 94, 132. 
Ulster : Aims, 166, 239, 247, 308, 407 ; 

Label, 237, 238. 
Ulster. De Burg, of. 239. 
Ulster, Elizabeth de Burg, of, 238. 
Ulster, Richard de Burg, Earl of, 406. 
Ulster, John de Burg, of, 406. 
Umbrated, Adumbrated, 88. 
Umphraville, D' : Arms, 181, 215. 
Undcfe, Undy, 18, 8a 
Unruled, 88. 

Unicom, 68 ; Supporter, 68, 281 ; Sup- 
porters of Scotland, 280. 302, 393, 

414 ; Supporter of Great Britain, 303, 

831. 
Union Device of Great Britain, 93; 

Augmentation of the Arms of the 

Duke of Wellington, 93, 436, 443, 

462. • 
Union Flag of Great Britain, 97, 146, 

155. 
Union Jack: the First, 26, 27, 290 ; the 

Second, 26, 27, 290. 
Universities of Oxford and Ounbridge : 

Arms, 360, 862. 
University College, Oxford : Arms, 360. 
Unmarried Ladies : Arms, 145. 
Upholders' Company, 370. 
Upton. Nicholas; his Treatise,* 199. 
Uriant, 82, 88. 

Ursins, Susan of : Aims, 308. 
Urswick, Sir Robert D*, 198. 
Usher of Black Rod, 343. 
Utting, Mr. R. B. ; his excellent Wood 

Engravings of Heraldic Subjects, 

889, 452. 

Yacha, Sir Richard de la, 224. 

Vair. 20, 54 ; in Early Shields, 198. 

Valence, De: Arms. 32, 65; Original 
Arms, 188 ; the Qrle of MarUets, 188 ; 
dimidjating Claremonte Nesle, 148; 
quartered by Hastings, 161, 172; 
Bordure of, 215 ; Labd of, 224. 

Valence, Aymer de. Earl of Pembroke : 
Effigy and Monument, 98, 148, 385, 
387; his Countess, 362. 

Valence^ Ethelmar de. Bishop of Win- 
chester, 18a 

Valence, Guy de, 188. 

Valence, William de, Earl of Pembroke ; 
his fine diapered Shield of Champlev^ 
Enamel, 38, (Frontispieee) ; Mr. Ber- 
rington*s fiul-size fiu^-simile En- 
graving of it, 486 ; his Effisy decorated 
with small Enamelled Shields of his 



Arms, 52, 465; his Monument in 

Westminster Abbey, 385, 387. 
Vambraoe, 54. 
Vamplate, 54. 
Vandals : Ensign of, 310. 
Varied Fields. 35. 
Vasa. of Sweden : Arms, 47a 
Vaux. De: Arms. 197. 
Vavasour, Mauger le : Seals, 404, 405 ; 

Arms, 459. 
Vans, Sir John, 187. 
Vans, Sir William, 187. 
Vaux, De : Arms, 197. 
Vavasour, Mauger le: Seals, 404, 405; 

Arms, 459. 
Venice, Heraldic Slab £rom« 258. 
Verdde, Veidoy, 88. 
Verdon, John de. 198. 
Verdun, Theobald de, 406. 
Vere, De : Arms and diapered Shield, 

38,73; Mullet, 47, 200. 
Vere. Sir Robert de : his Effigy at Sud- 

boiough, 226. 
Vere. Aubrey de : his differenced Shiekl, 

201. 
Vere, Hugh de : his Bordure, 201. 215. 
Vere, John de, K.G., Earl of Oxford. 

167. 200. 
Vere, Robert de. Earl of Oxford : Great 

Seal. 412. 
Vere, Robert de, K.G., Duke of Ireland 

and Marquess of Dublin, 117, 434. 
Vemey : Aims, 205. 
Vernon : Arms, 461 ; Motto, 124. 
Vert, 19, 132. 
Verted, Reverted, 88. 
Verulam. The Earl of, 185. 
Verules, 54. 
Vervels, Varvels, 54; Vervelled, Var- 

veiled, 88. 
Vesci, William de, 29. 
Vested, 8a 
Vestments, Episcopal, cfaaiged with 

Heraldic Insignia, 218. 
'^Vetusta Monumenta," Reference to. 

122. 
Vexillum, 49. 

Victoria Cross, Order, of the, 132, SUS. 
View. 132. 
Vigilant, 89. 

Vintners* Company and HaU, 369. 
Vipont, John de, 196. 
Viscount : Rank, Style, and Title, 133 ; 

Coronet and Robes, 133, 488; Sons 

and Daughters, 133. 
Viscountess, 133. 
Visitations, Heralds*. 132. 
Voided, 89 ; Cross. 2a 
Voiders. 32. 
Vol. 64. 
Volant. 89. 



INDEX. 



545 



Vonmt.89. 
Vulned, 89. 

Wadham College, Oxford: Arms, 362. 
Wake, of Lydel : Arms, 195 ; the pro- 
bable Bouioe of the York Label, 240. 
Wake, Sir Hugh, 211, 
Wake, Margaret, Countess of Kent, 240. 
Wake, MaiTgaret, wife of Sir Philip de 

Courtenay, 227. 
Wake, Thomas, Lord, 240. 
Wake, Thomas de Holland, E.G., Lord, 

227, 247. 
Wake, Thomas de Holland, E.G., Earl 

of Kent, and Baron, 247. 
Wake and Ormond Knot, 284. 
Waldeby, Thomas, Archbishop of York, 

100. 387. 
Waldemar H., of Denmark, 355. 
Wales; Arms of the Principality, 59, 
250, 324, 393; quartered by the 
Prince of Wales, 325. 
Wales, North : Arms, 325 ; South : Arms, 

325. 
Wales: Badges, 806, 332. 
Wales, Edward, styled Prince of, 237. 
Wales, Prince of, the Black Prince, the 

First, 237. 

Wales, Princes of, Plantagenets, 287; 

Tudors, 250 ; Stuarts, 250 ; the present 

Boyal Family, 250, 252 ; their Labels, 

236. 

Wales! Prince of : Earl of Chester, 74, 322. 

Wales, Prince of : Coronet, 321 ; Feather 

Badge, 260. 
Wales, Charlotte, Princess of, 250. 
Wales, H.R.H. Albert Edward. K.G., 

K.8.I.. Prince of, 252. 322. 
Wales, H.R.H. Aleiuoidra, Princess of, 

325. 
Wales. H.R.H. Albert Victor, of, 252. 
Walford, Mr., on the Effigy of Sir Arnold 

do Gaveston, 157. 
Walkefare, Sir Robert de, 201. 
WaUed,Murall^, 89. 
Waller, Messrs.; iheii noble Work on 

Brasses, 256. 
Wallenstein, Duke of Friedland : Arms, 

466. 
WaUingford, Abbot of St. Albaa's, 260. 
Walpole, Sir Edward, 347. 
Walsh, John, 190. 
Walshe, Thomas de, 212. 
Walthamstowe, 366, 368. 
Wantage, 343. 
Warbleton, 65. 

Ward, Soth, Bishop of Salisbury. 342. 
Warham. Archbishop, 100. 
Warre, John, 182. 
Wane, John de la, 183. 
Wane, William de la, 183. 



Warrenne, Warren, de, Earls of Warren 
and Surrey: Diapered Shields, 38; 
their connection with Castle Acre 
PrioiT, 360 ; their Arms quartered by 
the Duke of Norfolk, 79, 112, 168 ; 
Labels of. 224, 240; Shield of, com- 
pounded with the Aims of St. John, 
405, 463. 

Warrenne, John de, Earl of Surrey : Seal, 
405. 

Warrenne, Joan de. Countess of Surrey : 
Seal, 150, 405. 

Warrenne, Sir William de: Canton, 209. 

Warrenne, Richard Plantagenet, Duke 
of, 246, 

Warwick, the Beauchamp Chapel in the 
Church of St. Mary at, and its Monu- 
ments, 179, 203. 344. 387, 394. 

Warwick, the Bcauchamps, Earls of, 179, 
202. 

Warwick, Richard Beauchamp. K.G., 
Earl on 167, 269 ; Badge. 63, 256,394 ; 
Coronet. 104; Crest, 104, 256; Sup- 
porters, 278, 279 ; Standard, 289. 

Warwick, Thomas Beauchama K.G., 
Earl of, 113; Crest, 269; his fine 
Brass at Warwick. 256. 

Warwick, the Nevilles, Earls ot, 167. 
See Neville of Rabv. 

Warwick, Richard Neville, K.G., Earl 
of. 167. 

Warwick, Anne Neville, of, 166, 808. 

Warwick, Edward Plantagenet, Earl of, 
246. 

Warwick, George Plantagenet, Earl of, 
246. 

Warwick Roll, 166, 308. 

Wassingstone. Roger de, 194. 

Water-Bouget, 54. 

Waterford, See of, 55. 

Waterloo Medal, 353. 

Wattled, 89. . 

Wavy. 18, 89. 

Wax-Chandlers' Company, 870. 
• Wuvnflete, William de. Bishop of Win- 
chester, 107. 

Weavers' Company, 370. 

Welle. Sir John de, 193; John de. 215. 

Welle. Robert de. li«5. 

Wellesley : Arms, 461. 

Wellesley. Richard, K.G^ the Marquis. 
436. 

Wellington, Arthur Wellesley, KG., 
Duke of. 27, 93. 436. 443. 461 ; bis 
Paternal Difference. 207 ; Crest, 273. 
274; Supporters, 280. 

Wdlyngtono, Sir Edmund de, 202. 

Wemsley, 48. 

Wenden, 312. 

Wenncsley, Thomas d&lt;», 192. 

Westley Waterless, Brass at. 197. 
2n 



546 



INDEX. 



Westminster Abbey : Ardb of, 49, 360 ; 
Heraldry of Henry III. and Edward I. 
at, 12, 15, 377, 378 ; CJonfessor's Arms 
at, 126, 186, 378: 8bield of England 
at, 61 ; France Ancient at, 74, 189 ; 
France Modem at, 297, 378 ; Heraldry 
of Henry V. at, 378; HenUdry of 
Henry Y II. at, 378 ; Boyal Monuments 
at, 383,389. 

Westminster, Dean and Chapter : Aims, 
360. 

Westminster, City of: Arms, 366. 

Westminster Hall : Arms of the Confessor 
at, 126; Boyal Shield of Richard U. 
at, 162, 490; Badges of Richard IL 
at, 263, 454 ; Angd Supporters in the 
trussed Roof of, 490; Heraldry of, 377, 
378. 

Westminster, Heraldry of the New 
Palace at, 441. 

Westmorland, Earl of, 264, 269. See 
Neville. 

Westone, John de, 215. 

Westphalen, of Saxony : Arms, 469. 

Westphalia : Arms, 299, 313. 

Whatton, Shield of EfBgy at, 212, 213. 

Wheat-Ears, 71 ; Badge of Abbot John 
de Wheatliampstede, and his appro- 
priate Motto, 453, 457. 

Wheathampstede, John, Abbot of St. 
Alban's : Arms, 72 ; Arms of his Abbey 
differenced by him, 218 ; Chantry and 
its fine Shields, 453, 457; Badge and 
Motto, 453, 457. 

Wheathamstead, Brass at, 454. 

Whitchurch, 344. 

White Boar: Badge, 339. 

White Carmelites : Seal, 414. 

White Elephant, Order and Insignia of^ 
356. 

White Hart: Badge, 258, 263, 278, 304, 
454. 

White Hind : Badge, 277. 

Whitworth, EflBgy at, 33. 

Widow ; her Arms, 145. 

Widow of Peer ; her Arms, 169. 

Widower ; his Arms, 144. 

Widville, Woodville, Elizabeth, Queen 
Consort of England, 244 ; her Aug- 
mented Arms, 165, 308. 

Widville, Richard, K.G., Earl Rivers, 
244; Mantling, 116; Aims, 210. 

Wigtone, John de, 215. 

William I.: imputed Arms, 293, 295; 
Arms of Consort, 306. 

William H., imputed Arms, 295 ; Mo- 
nument in Winchester Cathadml, 
384. 

William m.: Arms, 298; Coins, 418; 
Standard, 301 ; Arms of Consort, 
298. 



William IV. : Aims, 300; Arms of Con- 
sort, 313, 314. 

William Plantagenet, "of Hatfield," 
237 ; EfBgy and Monument, 102, 237, 
385. 

William Stuart, K.G., Duke of Glou- 
cester, 251 ; Garter-Plate, 251, 328. 

William Henry, Duke of Gloucester, 251. 

William Frederick, Duke of Gloucester, 
252. 

William de Longesp^e, Earl of Salis- 
bury, 225 ; Arms, 60, 89, 154 ; Seals, 
403, 412 ; Monument and Effigy in 
Salisbury Cathedral, 385. 

William de Romare Id., Earl of Lincoln ; 
Seal 403. 

Willoughby d'Eresby, Lady, 175 : Lord, 
his Helm and Crest-wieaUi, 270. 

WUloughby, Sir John, 264. 

Willoughby : Aims, 459. 

Willoughby, Robert, Lord Broke, 205. 

Wimbomo Minster, 344. 

Wimington, Bra^ at, 191, 269. 

Wmcholsea, 382. 

Winchester Cathedral : Monuments, 157, 
188, 384 ; Chantry of Bishop Langton, 
123 ; de^Ued Slabs, 394. 

Winchester, See and Bishops of, 33, 96 ; 
Bishops Prelates of the Garter, 342. 

Winchester School : Arms, 364. 

Windiester, Roger de Quinoey, Earl of, 
197. 403. 

Winchester, Saer de Quinoey, Earl of, 
219. 

Windsor, Chapel of St. George at, 340, 
378. See Garter, Order of, and StaU- 
plates. 

Windsor, Dean of, Registrar &lt;rf the 
Garter, 343. 

Windsor Hendd, 111. 

Winged, 89. 

Wingfield, 344, 386. 

Winnowing Fan, 51, 282. 

Winterton, The Earl o^ 29. 

Winwick. Brass at, 132. 

Wiston, Brass at, 269. 

Wivenhoe, Brass at, 394. 

Woburn, Brass at, 369. 

Wodehouse, The Baron, 274, 434. 

Wodestock, Woodstock : Rebus, 76, 290. 
304. S^eeEdmond and Thomas "of 
Woodstock." 

Woodward, the Rev. John, M.A. : his 
Paper in " Notes and Queries ** on the 
Aims of Leon, 490. 

Wootton under-Edge, Brass at, 68. 335. 

Worcester Cathednd : Effigy of Lady, 52 : 
Beauchamp Monument, 179; Kffigy 
and Monument of King Johii, 3S4 : 
Tudor Chantry, 40, ' 75, 260, 8S6: 
Heraldic Tiles, 378. 



INDEX. 



547 



Woroesier, the Bishops and See of, 359. 

Worcester College, Oxford, 361. 

Worcester, John Tiptoft, Earl of: Seal, 
278. 

Worcester, Charles Somerset, Earl of, 
438. 

Works on " Heraldry," 483, 

Wreath, 109, 133; Wreathed, 89. 

Wreath; Crest, 265. 

Wright, Mr. ; his new Version of the 
Caerlaverock Boll, 482, 487. 

Wriothsley, Ghirter ; his Arms borne by 
the College of Arms, 364. 

Wurtemburg : Arms, Supporters, Flag, 
479. 

Wyilevil, John de : Crest, 271. 

Wykeham, William de, Bidiop of Win- 
chester ; his Pastoral Staff, 49. 

Wylonghby, De : Arms, 460. 

Wynne, Sir W. W., 63. 

Wyvem, 68. 

Yarmouth, Great.' See Great Yannouth. 

York : Arms of the See, 358. 

York: the Archbishop of, his Bank, 

Style, Title, and Precedence, 91, 96, 

429. 
York, the Dean and Chapter of, 360. 



York Cathedral, 100, 102. 237, 385. 
York, Church of St. Cross at, 866. 
York, City, 366. 

York, Elizabeth of, 166, 308, 384. 
York, Edmond, First Duke of, 239, 

241. 
York, Edward, Second Duke of, 243. 
York, Bichard, Third Duke of, 245. 
York, Edward, Fourth Duke of. 245. 
York. Bichaid, Fifth Duke of, 246. 
York, Frederick, Duke of, 251. 
York, James, Duke of, 251. 
York Herald, 111. 
York, Label of, 240. 
York, Bodge and Collar of, 134, 388. 

339. 
York, Boeee of, 75, 76. 260, 303, 304, 

305. 
Youghal: Seals of the Borough, 147. 
Young, Sir Charles George, Garter King 

of Anns, 341. 
Younger Sons, Arms of, 143. 

Zouche, de la : Differenced Shields, 173 ; 

Badge, 261. 
Zouche, Alan de la: 247. 
Zouche, Maud de la, 247. 
Zowche, Le Sr. la, 209. 



ADDENDA AND COBBIGENDA. 

Ftige 38.— In line 6, for Ricrahd L, read Richard II. 
» 65.— In line 26, for Earl of, read Baron. 
„ 68.— In line 13, for dexter, read sinister. 
„ tS.^In line 14. for Trenel, read FreaaeL 
„ 97.— Add to laat line a reference to page 488. 

w 123.— In line 13, for Ramiydge, read Ramryge. 

., 134.— In last line, for No. 46, read No. 48. 

N 13S.— To second line add references to ppw 168, 170. 

„ 152.— The first Diagram is No. 329 B. 

w 229.— Read Molkswobth, and Harpus. 

„ 230.— In flnt line, for No. 407, read No. 487. 

H 236.— In last Une but two. for HoUand of Kent, read Wodutoek of Kent, 

,. 249.— T9 line 24, add references to pp. 74. 303. 

M 277. -In line 22, for No. 502, read No. 509. 

„ 350.— After line 10, insert—" Dean of the Order, the Dean of WeBtminster." 

w 406.— In line 1, for Edward II., read Edward I. 

M 406.— Tbe wood-cot of the seal of Matilda de FilUol is printed rerersod. 

• 446.— In line 30, for Furdoonjuir, read Furdoomjzr. 
„ 446.— To last line add. " No. 731. p. 506.." 

• 461.— In line 8, for No. 725. read No. 730. 
„ 481.— In Une 2. for No. 725, read No. 730. 

Plate XTI.-For No. 339 a, read No. 339 c. 

„ XXXVI.— For No. 568. read No. 568 a. 
» LXXXII.— For MosiTAGCTi. read Moxtacutr. 



LONDON; 

rCINTCO BT XT. CT/)WES AND SONS, STAKtOV} STREET 
AND CIIAUIKO CB06&amp; 



4- 



J 



10 



